 We will now hear argument in the Cherokee Nation against Thompson and Thompson against the Cherokee Nation. Mr. Miller.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: These two contract cases concern whether the Government is liable in money damages under the Contract Disputes Act and section 110 of the Indian Self-Determination Act when the Secretary fails to fully pay a contract price for the --
 Would you mind explaining to us how these two cases relate? The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit decision went one way and the Tenth Circuit went another. And are the claims at all overlapping? How are they differentiated?
 No, Justice O'Connor. They're -- they're not overlapping. The claims in the Federal Circuit case involved three contracts covering fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996. And the Cherokee contract at issue in the case that went through the Tenth Circuit is fiscal year 1997 contract and funding agreement. The section -- remedial section of the act, section 110 --
 But they're certainly at odds on the legal theory.
 Yes, they are, Your Honor. The Federal Circuit applied standard, bedrock Government contracting law, primarily the rule that when a contract payment is conditioned on there being an appropriation, the payment right vests in full once the appropriation is enacted by Congress. And secondly, the court ruled that the Indian Self-Determination Act does not bar the payment of the contracts in this case under the circumstances presented. And to the contrary. We submit that the Secretary's construction of that clause would undo the act, would undo section 106(b) of the act --
 Are the circumstances any different in the two situations, the Cherokee Nation case and the one in the Federal Circuit? Are -- are the circumstances, giving rise to the claim, different in any respect that could account for a difference in outcome?
 No, Justice O'Connor. There -- there is no difference in that respect, and there is an overlap in -- in this sense. The Shoshone-Paiute contract that arose through the Tenth Circuit case did involve fiscal year 1996, the same fiscal year as the Cherokee contract that covered fiscal year 1996. So in that sense, both cases involved the -- the same relevant issues. The -- the key, we think, to the resolution of the act is found in the act on page 12a of the appendix to our opening blue brief. The act was amended in this section twice, in 1988 and in 1994, for three reasons: to secure contract funding, to reduce the Federal bureaucracy, and to eliminate secretarial funding discretion over contract funding issues. In section 12a, 450j-1(a), the bottom half of the page, it is stated in subparagraph (1) that the amount of funds provided under the terms of self-determination contracts entered into pursuant to this subchapter shall not be less than the appropriate Secretary would have otherwise provided. And then directly pertinent to this case is subparagraph (2), which directs -- which addresses contract support costs. There shall be added to the amount required by paragraph (1) contract support costs which shall consist of certain items. Incidentally, these items typically cover the cost of insurance, audit costs, procurement costs that might otherwise be administered for the Government by the Office of Personnel Management or personnel costs that might otherwise be administered by the Office of Personnel Management.
 Does the -- do the actual contracts reduce the -- the CSC's to a dollar amount or --
 Yes, they do.
 So -- so we know -- they -- they knew at the moment the contract was signed what it was going to cost.
 That is correct, Justice Souter. In the case of the Shoshone-Paiute contract, when the parties decided to renegotiate the contract amount, they entered into an amendment to specify the new, updated contract amount.
 I don't want to get ahead of you in taking us through the statute, so you can defer the question if -- if you choose. But it seems to me relevant to (a). Does -- is -- is part of the submission that the Government used some of the funds that otherwise would have gone to you for its own monitoring and -- of -- of health contracts and that that's what's in dispute? Or was it just general overhead for other programs it used?
 It -- it is precisely, Justice Kennedy, what -- what you stated. In fact, we can turn directly to page 14a --
 I -- I stated an or. I -- what I -- I stated at the outset?
 The -- the Government took money for its own Federal functions instead of -- including contract monitoring --
 Including contract monitoring.
 Including contract monitoring. Including contract monitoring. In fact, they say so in their brief and -- and defend that action. The -- the sections on page 12a and 13a articulate in quite a lot of detail the nature of the contract support costs that must be added.
 These are strange contracts, of course, aren't they? I mean, are there any other contracts that the Government has to enter into? I mean, the Secretary has to give these tribes the authority to take over, in effect, implementation of the -- of a Federal health program, doesn't he?
 That is correct, Justice Scalia.
 Well, I -- why would you expect that this strange kind of contract should -- should, prima facie, be governed by the same rules as to appropriations as other contracts --
 Because --
 -- where -- where an agency, having due regard to how much money is appropriated, will limit the number of contracts it enters into? But -- but here you're creating a situation where the agency has to contract and yet has no control over having enough money to -- to meet the contractual obligations. It seems to me a -- a strange way to run a railroad.
 It -- it is a unique contractual situation, Justice Scalia, but one that Congress fully anticipated. And -- and I would explain it this way. First of all, there is the Contract Disputes Act which Congress said applies to these contracts. The contracts were so unique that prior to 1988, the Interior Board of Contract Appeals, in a decision called the Busby case, had ruled that these contracts could not be enforced under the Contract Disputes Act precisely for the reason Justice Scalia articulated. Congress changed that. In 1988, Congress amended section 110 of the act, reproduced at the bottom of page 26a, and gave the Court of Claims, then the Court of Claims, and the district courts concurrent jurisdiction over money damages claims under the Contract Disputes Act. And the legislative history explains that Congress did this precisely to overcome the Busby decision and to make these contracts enforceable for the stated contract price.
 But further to Justice Scalia's point, don't the contracts in question themselves contain clauses that say this is not a procurement contract?
 The -- the procurement contract -- that is correct. Not the contracts themselves, Your Honor. The -- the act says that --
 Oh, the act says that they're not procurement contracts.
 -- the contracts are not procurement contracts, Justice Kennedy. That's correct. These contracts began as procurement contracts. They had been procurement contracts, and even still, they were not enforced under the Court of -- the Interior Board of Contract Appeals decision in the Busby decision. Congress relieved the contractors of the procurement system because they felt that the agency had built up an enormous contract monitoring bureaucracy which it wanted to eliminate. And for that reason, it eliminated the procurement rules in the hopes that the contract monitoring bureaucracy would be eliminated along with it.
 Mr. Miller, do --
 Justice Ginsburg.
 -- on -- on the interpretation you've just explained to us, does that mean that the Secretary has no authority under this statute or generally to reserve some portion of this for what you call Federal functions, that it -- every penny of the appropriation could go to the costs of this contract and nothing left in the till for the so-called Federal functions?
 Justice Ginsburg, I -- I would put my answer in this context. There are many sources from which the Government could have reprogrammed to pay these contracts. It could have been, yes, as we submit, from the funds spent on Federal functions and secretarial administration. It could have been from the up to $88 million increases Congress was making every year. It could have been from the up to $98 million in leftover appropriations the agencies had every year, and it could have been from the regional and headquarters offices that the agencies had where they don't administer services.
 But your -- your answer is, yes, if it came to that, they --
 That's the duty Congress imposed upon the Secretary. The Secretary was free not to reprogram. That's -- that's a choice the Secretary had and the Secretary made it. The question is what are the ramifications of that choice and we submit --
 Well, let me ask you another question related. Suppose -- this is an individual action. These are individual actions. They're not class actions.
 Correct, Your Honor.
 Do the ones who come to court to sue get paid in full even though there may be many other self-determination contracts out there, and that if you gave them all their fair share, none of them would be paid in full? Does it just depend on first come to court, first served, and the less litigious are just out of luck?
 Your Honor, we -- we do not believe that that -- that should be the outcome. That would advantage the contractors that came forward and not take account of the entire situation. We think the global situation has to be looked at. The total amount of the contracts that were not paid in fiscal year 1994 --
 I mean, you can't get blood out of a turnip. I mean, Justice Ginsburg is asking the question, what if there is not enough money to go around?
 If there were only sufficient money to pay half of the contract shortfalls --
 Right.
 -- without violating the clause and the Secretary had the discretion not to reduce appropriations, or he could, for programs serving other tribes, and then the tribes would only be entitled to half of the shortfall, if there was only a sufficient amount of money.
 Didn't the tribes get notice they might not get the full amount of the -- the CSC, and so they had ample opportunity to cut back on their spending?
 No, Justice Kennedy, and -- and to the contrary. In fiscal year 1994, the Indian Health Service was telling everybody they were paying them in full. They told the General Accounting Office they paid everybody in full on page 32 of the GAO report cited in the Government's brief. But --
 So these -- these are reliance damages in a sense.
 The -- the tribes expected to be paid. The Shoshone-Paiute tribes were told they would be paid in full in the first year.
 I mean, they -- they were out of pocket for money they spent before they knew, other than the statutory notice they had, that they wouldn't get the full amount?
 That is correct. That is correct.
 Well, when do the tribal contractors know how much money the Government actually will have available to spend?
 The contractors don't know until the year is over because throughout the year, the Government reserves the power, although not exercised, but stated in a circular, to reprogram. And the appropriations --
 What -- what do you mean by that? You said a second ago the Secretary had the option to reprogram. What do you mean by reprogram?
 When the Secretary prepares a budget to the Congress, it states usually a lump sum amount of, say, $1.8 billion. We -- we take $400 million off the top or $300 million off the top because that was specified by Congress for certain purposes. But the balance is a lump sum. The Secretary crafts a budget. The budget is not adopted by Congress, just a dollar amount is adopted by Congress. Now, Congress can step in and take a particular item and earmark that item and cap it if it chooses, but it didn't do that in these years.
 Yes, but the -- the tribes have to enter contracts not knowing how much money is going to be there at the end of the day?
 The tribes enter into contracts, as most Government contractors do when they enter into contracts before an appropriation is made, not knowing if the agency will have the money to pay them. That's okay. The problem is when the statute says it's subject to the availability of appropriations and Congress enacts the appropriations. It's been the law for 120 years that at that point, the right to payment vests and the tribe is entitled to be paid.
 All right. So how was that appropriation money in fact used by the Federal Government, do you say?
 The Federal Government --
 There was the appropriation.
 Yes.
 And the tribes had already entered into contracts. Now, how was that lump sum used?
 The agency then, under this Court's teaching in Lincoln v. Vigil, has complete discretion over how it spends its appropriation except insofar as --
 Is that what you mean by programming?
 Yes, thank you, Justice Souter, for taking me back to your question. What we mean is that the Secretary submits a budget, but the budget is not binding on the Secretary. It's not binding as a matter of law because Congress didn't adopt it. And as conditions change over the course of the year, the agency readjusts its budget, which we call reprogramming.
 So programming is allocating various segments of the lump sum to various purposes.
 Correct.
 Okay.
 And the Secretary retains complete discretion as this Court taught --
 And is that done without regard to the contract amounts that the tribes have entered into?
 Well, it should not be done without regard to the contract amounts --
 Is that in fact how it was done?
 That is in fact how it was done.
 And is it still done that way?
 Well, the times have changed. Since 1998, fiscal year 1998, Congress has imposed caps on the contracts and court costs that the agency has. So there's no question the agency cannot pay more than Congress gives it. When Congress only gives it $100 million or $200 million for contract support costs, that's it. The Secretary cannot be sued for failing to pay more.
 But didn't -- didn't Congress, even before that, impose a significant limitation on how much the Secretary could pay? What do you with the provision in -- in (b) of -- of the section that you were reading from? Notwithstanding any other provision in this subchapter, the provision of funds under this subchapter is subject to the availability of appropriations and the Secretary is not required to reduce funding for programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe to make funds available to another tribe or tribal organization under this chapter. I mean, what -- what money that the Secretary expends is -- is not expended for programs, projects, or activities that serve a tribe?
 Justice Scalia, we read this -- this clause with -- keeping in mind the first sentence first of the sentence. The first sentence, which begins on the preceding page, page 14a, says that the amount of funds required by subsection (a), (1) shall not be reduced to make funding available for contract monitoring or administration by the Secretary. And the subparagraph (3) in the middle of page 15a, shall not be reduced by the Secretary to pay for Federal functions.
 Well, that's all very good, but --
 But then there's an exception.
 -- then the last paragraph begins with the word notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter. So this --
 We --
 -- it seems to me, overrides everything else. Unless -- unless you can persuade me that that -- that that provision doesn't give the Secretary the authority to -- to allocate the available funds among other activities that serve tribes, I -- I think it trumps whatever else you appeal to.
 Justice Scalia, for -- for two reasons we think it cannot. First of all, if that exception swallowed up the rule set forth in the first sentence, it would defeat the whole purpose of the act. And more, in the statute on page 21, there is a mandatory rule of construction that Congress has articulated which, interestingly enough, the Government never cites in the statutory interpretation case. And this rule says on page 21, 1(a)(2), each provision of the act --
 Wait.
 Page -- sorry --
 21 of --
 21a of our opening blue brief.
 Okay, 21a, good.
 21a, correct. Each provision of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act and each provision of this contract shall be liberally construed for the benefit of the contractor. That statement is repeated as well in every --
 Oh, fine, but you still have to look at that last sentence in subsection (b) and grapple with what it means. The Secretary is not required to reduce funding for programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe to make funds available to another tribe.
 So what could it mean? That's our challenge.
 Now, what does it mean?
 We have to give it meaning. We believe it means the -- as the Secretary always said when -- and -- and said at the time these amendments were adopted in 1988, that's services on the ground, the hospitals and clinics. If I walked into the office of the headquarters of the Indian Health Service in Rockville, Maryland, I'm not going to see doctors and nurses in white jackets. I'm not going to see patients and counselors. There aren't programs serving tribes in these headquarters offices, and in these area offices, large portions of what they do are administrative functions.
 All right. May -- may I interrupt you there? And tell me if I understand the -- the position in your brief correctly. I thought the position that you took there was ultimately regardless of what the notwithstanding clause means, there's enough money to pay all the contracts in the appropriation that is actually made. And if any money is going to be squeezed, the person who's going to be squeezed or the -- is the -- is the agency itself. Its bureaucracy is going to have less money. And I understood your argument to be that given the provisions you read earlier in this section, Congress has made a positive decision that if there's a choice between paying the contract amounts and squeezing the bureaucracy, the bureaucracy gets squeezed. Is that your position?
 That is our position.
 If that is your position, do you have to even grapple with difficulties about the notwithstanding clause?
 Well, we still need to provide some meaning to the -- to the provision that says the Secretary may not -- does not have to reduce funding for programs serving other tribes. I guess, I think we do need to grapple with the clause in order not to --
 But -- but I thought you were saying you could -- you could -- the -- the Secretary doesn't have to reduce funding for other tribes. The Secretary can pay the full contract costs, and if anybody is going to get the short end, it's going to be the bureaucracy.
 It's going to be the bureaucracy.
 Just give them the -- just give them the money.
 It's not going to be the programs on the ground serving the tribes. It's going to be the bureaucracy.
 Okay.
 Now, it may be felt --
 To put it -- this is a competition between two bureaucracies, the tribal bureaucracy that is administering the program and the Secretary's bureaucracy which is administering the program of programs. I mean, it's -- it's not as though it's a bureaucracy against the people. The whole purpose of this was to turn over the bureaucratic management of these programs from Government bureaucrats to tribal bureaucrats. I mean, it --
 Well, I would -- I would --
 -- you -- you paint it as though the -- you know, who cares about the bureaucrats. The -- the Government just wasn't interested in the bureaucrats. That may well be, but there -- there are bureaucrats at both ends of this thing.
 I say that for two reasons. First of all, the -- the Congress, in our opinion, clearly privileged the tribal contracts over the Secretary's Federal functions. But more practically, let's look at the Shoshone-Paiute Tribes. They took over a hospital that had a $5 million budget in round numbers, and the contract support costs requirement was $2 million. So the contract was in round numbers $7 million. So they get the hospital, $5 million to run it. They don't get the $2 million. Now, they have $3 million to run the hospital. It's not that they didn't get their bureaucracy. They didn't get the full hospital operational budget because they had to pay the fixed costs of carrying insurance, undertaking the audits required by Federal law. There were actual reductions in services so severe, in fact, that the Shoshone-Paiute Tribe nearly lost accreditation.
 Can I ask you a basic question --
 Yes, Justice Breyer.
 -- which maybe others understand, but I'm confused. Imagine that this has nothing to do with Indians. It is simply an ordinary contract. Now, my understanding is that ordinary contracts say subject to appropriations. So we have to decide was there an appropriation. In our imaginary department of Government, the appropriation is $1 billion. Nothing is earmarked for anything. They enter into contracts that amount to $999 million. Now, they pay out $990 million, and their -- what the department says is, look, everybody knows we need at least $10 million to run our central bureaucracy. So there's no valid contract here. The appropriation wasn't made. Now, my understanding of ordinary Government contract law is to decide whether that $10 million was in principle available for the contracts. You look to something called the purpose-time-amount test. So was it during the same time? Yes. Is it in an appropriate amount? Yes. But is it available for this purpose? Ah, I'm not sure. All right. Now, I want -- if I have the -- the theory of it right, I want you to tell me what the money was in your case that is the equivalent of the $10 million in my example that you believe in principle was available to pay these -- for this Indian expenditure. Just pretend it's a regular contract. What is the equivalent of that $10 million?
 The equivalent of the $10 million would be sums not spent on anything --
 Yes.
 -- in this case, up to $100 million.
 Yes, okay. And anything else?
 Any of the increases, any of the sums. And then we move to this statute --
 Well, forget this statute for a second because I'll stop you there. I want you to tell me why those sums -- I get the time. I get the amount.
 Why the purpose.
 Explain to me why it is one of the purposes for which those appropriations were made, i.e., the equivalent of the $10 million, to go pay for this.
 Well, that's one of the things the -- the Government and we agree upon.
 It was one of the purposes.
 One of the purposes was paying contracts, and that's because in this act, the appropriation says here's $1.4 billion or $1.8 billion to carry out the Indian Self-Determination Act. So that satisfies the purpose test.
 All right. So you think -- you and the Government agree then that were this an ordinary contract case, there is no doubt that a legally binding contract would have been entered into and the clause, subject to appropriations, would not work for the Government.
 That is correct, Your Honor.
 Okay.
 Well, you can't say that the Government agrees to that. You certainly agree to it.
 No, no. Were it an ordinary --
 The Government --
 -- were it an ordinary contract.
 In -- in the hypothetical. No. I think the Government would agree that the rule of Ferris and Blackhawk, the Dougherty rule from the Court of Claims, 1983, all stand for the proposition when you sign a contract with the Government and a lump sum appropriation comes, it's not your job to start monitoring Government operations and figuring out how much do they want to boost their functions for this or that or the other, and the --
 So our issue as far as you're concerned -- and I'll ask the Government the same question -- is, is this contract different from an ordinary contract because of A, B, C, D Indian reservations, et cetera? And your claim is, I can't find any difference. And their claim is there will be some difference. Is that right?
 That is correct. They claim these aren't contracts -- Justice Kennedy.
 Well, you did say the -- these contracts were unique.
 These contracts are unique. The contracts in Winstar were unique. The contracts in the United States v. New Mexico advance costs -- advance funded cost reimbursable contracts. Many contracts are unique. The question is whether the distinction makes a difference in the law. The distinction here that these are not procurement contracts, that can't be decisive.
 Well, the Government says it's unique because the tribes are providing governmental services. It doesn't really cite us a case where, say, a city or a subdivision has sued under a contract.
 But that's not unique either because the -- the Government, the Department of Defense in Iraq contracts out governmental services, the provision of food to our troops in Iraq. That's a quintessential governmental services, feeding the military. But they contract it out. No one would suggest there that just because it's a governmental service, it qualifies that contract as a lesser contract than any other contract.
 Well, they didn't contract it out to the government of Iraq. They contracted it out to a private contractor. I mean, what -- what makes this unique is that the whole purpose of it was to give these -- these tribes more governmental power, more self-determination. The whole purpose was to enable the tribes to act as governments.
 Absolutely. And even Congress considered --
 That's -- that's what makes it different from private contracts --
 We --
 -- even -- even with Halliburton.
 We --
 I mean, Halliburton is not an Indian tribe and doesn't purport to be governing anybody.
 We submit that that difference was considered by Congress. In the 1988 amendments, there's even language that says, we're thinking about maybe calling this an intergovernmental agreement, but we've decided to call it a contract because we want it to be enforceable as a contract, just as other Government contracts for goods and services are enforced. And that was the language of the -- of the Senate report. They then imposed the Contract Disputes Act and provided a remedy in money damages. In those respects, along with the canon of construction, we believe that these contracts are fully enforceable for the stated contract amount. I'd like to reserve the balance of my time, Justice Stevens.
 Thank you. Mr. Srinivasan.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Apart from the roughly 2 percent of the annual lump sum appropriation that the Secretary withheld for performance of those core agency functions that the agency itself was required to perform, the Secretary allocated the entire remaining 98 percent of its lump sum appropriation among tribes. Now, the tribes have to point to some source of funding within that lump sum appropriation.
 Well, they just did, the 2 percent. So my question to you is the same. I asked, let's imagine this had nothing to do with tribes, nothing to do with it. It was a typical, ordinary Government contract for pencils. All right? Or for soda water. Now, and everything were the same. Under those circumstances, just an ordinary contract -- and they point to that 2 percent and they say that is legally speaking -- we didn't expect you to pay it. We just won a lawsuit in the Court of Claims. But -- but we have -- we have a contract here. Okay? That's what we're just saying. The -- the subject to appropriation clause doesn't nix the contract because that 2 percent is available, legally speaking, time, purpose, and -- and amount. Okay? Classic. Now, what's the Government's view there?
 No.
 Is it available or not were this an ordinary contract?
 No. With respect to the 2 percent that's reserved for inherent Federal functions, that's not available.
 I'm asking -- all right. Are -- is the Government's view then let's treat this just as an ordinary contract? Still it -- there was no money available.
 With respect to --
 Legally speaking under the time-purpose-amount test.
 Well, Justice Breyer, I'm drawing a distinction between the 2 percent that's reserved for core agency functions and --
 No.
 -- it's been a background principle of Government contracting law that there are certain core agency functions that -- that the Government is required to perform for itself and that it can't contract out. So I think that informs the interpretation of the subject to availability clause.
 Now, I would like an answer to my question, yes or no. If this were an ordinary contract with a subject to appropriations clause, is -- would the Government be saying this is invalid because the appropriations were not there?
 Well, you have to look at the particular context.
 There must be a yes or no answer to that.
 It would be no if this statutory regime governed, Justice Breyer.
 No. What it is is a contract for pencils. Can you not -- is it impossible --
 If -- if all --
 -- to make -- you see what I'm driving --
 If -- if all that's at issue is a standard subject to availability clause in a contract and there were no reduction clause, as there is in this statute, and you're dealing with the standard procurement context, then there is a Court of Claims decision, the Blackhawk decision, that suggests, albeit in a footnote, that in that situation, there are funds available in the sense that they're legally unrestricted.
 Correct, and which are the funds that are -- that would be available here? Which are they?
 There aren't any funds that are available here in our view because --
 If this were under Blackhawk.
 Under Blackhawk, it would be -- it would -- it would essentially affect the entire lump sum appropriation because there's no legal requirement that the lump sum appropriation be -- be directed in any particular manner. Now, there are some provisions in the --
 That includes the 2 percent that you keep referring to.
 That -- that would include in the -- that would include the 2 percent. But there are provisions, I should note parenthetically, in the appropriations act that say specifically, for example, that not to exceed a certain amount is to be used for a particular function or at least a certain amount is to be used, for example, for contract health services. So you'd have to take into account --
 Okay. Then let me do this then.
 -- those particular provisos.
 You say if this were a classic, ordinary contract, the money would have been available legally speaking. Nobody says practically speaking, and they could have brought their lawsuit. Now, tell me specifically, if you can -- and this may take you the whole time. You want to make whatever argument you want. What is it that's special about this contract that brings it out of ordinary contracting principles?
 Well, first and foremost, the text of the statute. If you look at page 15a of the appendix to -- to the tribes' briefs, this isn't your standard, garden variety subject to availability clause. You have to look at the particular context in which this statute --
 Well, the language is the same.
 It's not, Justice O'Connor, with respect. It says, notwithstanding any other provision -- and I'm reading at the bottom of page 15a -- the provision of funds under this subchapter is subject to the availability of appropriations and -- and this is --
 That phrase is the same, subject to the availability of appropriations.
 That particular phrase resembles the one that Justice Breyer posited in his hypothetical.
 Exactly.
 But the term available -- and I think this is critical. The term available is repeated in what's been referred to as the reduction clause, and I don't think one can understand what the term available means unless it considers the meaning of that term throughout that entire sentence.
 But -- but the other -- the other side says you don't have to get to that because you could have paid the contract amounts here without reducing funds available for other tribes. It's simply that it would have squeezed you in your budget, your -- your headquarters operating budget for IHS. So they say, if I understand them, that the -- that the nonreduction clause doesn't save you here because you could have paid it without reducing things for other tribes.
 I -- I think that argument is incorrect. First of all, it's an incorrect interpretation of the terms of the reduction clause. But second of all, the notion that funds for inherent Federal functions, the 2 percent that the agency reserved to perform its core agency functions, were available for contracting is contrary to -- to the terms of the ISDA itself. And if you'll look at page 12a -- and I'm quoting from 450j-1(a)(1) -- what provision says is the amount of funds provided under the terms of self-determination contracts include the amount that the Secretary, quote, would have otherwise provided. And then later on down in the paragraph --
 I don't see that. Where?
 I'm sorry. It's --
 Not less. Right?
 Shall not -- shall be not less than the amount that the appropriate Secretary would have otherwise provided. And then further down in the paragraph in the last -- in the last clause, including support of administrative functions that are otherwise contractable. And what otherwise contractable denotes is that there are certain functions that are not otherwise contractable, namely those core, inherent Federal functions that the agency itself is required to provide. And so what 450j-1(a) implements is the background understanding that funds for core agency functions don't have to be turned over to the contracting tribes because the agency requires those funds in order to continue essentially to exist as a Federal agency.
 But -- but I thought the submission of the petitioners' counsel was that some of these funds were used to monitor the contracts which are functions the tribes could have performed. So is there a factual disagreement here?
 I don't think so, Justice Kennedy. I think it's more of a characterization disagreement. There -- it's true that in a descriptive sense, one might refer to some of these funds as used for contract monitoring, but what 450j-1(a) says is that whatever you might call it, the funds that are used for core agency functions are outside the funds to be -- to be turned over.
 It doesn't say that. It doesn't say that. What it says is otherwise contractable. And they could certainly -- for a lay person like me in this, you'd think, well, we could have a provision that says $180,000 is hereby authorized to be spent only for the Secretary of Veterans Affairs or Secretary of Interior. Well, if it said that, then that's not otherwise contractable because there's a statutory limit.
 But -- but --
 So otherwise contractable sounds like a -- a statutory question.
 But it -- it's not talking about money that's otherwise contractable. It says, including supportive administrative functions that are otherwise contractable. It's talking about a limitation upon the contractability of functions --
 Correct.
 -- not the use of funds.
 Well, it's talking about both because the -- the first part of subparagraph (1) is the amount of funds. It's relating to the amount of funds that are required to be transferred, and what it stands for is that funds for supportive administrative functions that are not otherwise contractable, i.e., those core agency functions that the agency is required to perform itself, those funds aren't required to be turned over to contracting tribes. And that just reflects the common sense principle that the agency has to continue to exist to perform some core functions.
 But how do you -- how do you square that with the -- on page 14a -- reductions and, as Mr. Miller read to us, shall not be reduced to make funding available for contract managing -- monitoring or administration by the Secretary, shall not be reduced by the Secretary to pay for Federal functions, including but not limited to, and then a string of what I assume falls under the heading Federal functions.
 Justice Ginsburg, the way we square that under the statute is that the leading -- the initial sentence in subsection (b) says the amount of funds required by subsection (a) of this section. And our view of the statute is that funds for inherent Federal functions were never required to be transferred under subsection (a) to begin with. And so what (b) deals with is the funds that are left over after the funds for inherent Federal functions are taken off the top.
 So are these noninherent Federal functions shall not be reduced to pay for Federal functions? So there's inherent Federal functions and noninherent?
 Oh, absolutely there are. The Federal functions is the broader set of -- it could essentially encompass everything the Federal Government does. Inherent Federal functions refers to that core set of functions that the agency itself is required to perform. And the distinction between inherent Federal functions and Federal functions, although it might seem trivial as a semantic matter, is reflected in fact in the definitions in title V of the ISDA where it specifically defines inherent Federal functions as a subset of Federal functions.
 Does it ever define them as noncontractable? I mean, I -- I -- your answer, I suppose, is well, what -- what do you think they're talking about, but does it ever expressly get to --
 It -- it does.
 -- the point of contractability?
 It does, Justice Scalia -- Justice Souter. Excuse me.
 Thank you, but apologize to him. (Laughter.)
 And we describe the -- the relevant provision in our brief, if you'll bear with me for just one second, on page 31. When Congress enacted the title IV self-governance provisions that relate to the BIA -- and this is at the beginning of the first partial paragraph that begins with of particular significance. There's a provision there, 25 U.S.C. 458cc(k). And the provision reads that nothing in this section is intended or shall be construed to expand or alter existing statutory authorities so as to authorize the Secretary to enter into any agreement with respect to functions that are inherently Federal. And I think what that signifies is that there are some functions that are not contractable and can't be turned over to the tribes.
 That -- that all may be true, of course. They're talking about don't contract out to the Indians something that should be done in Washington. But what has that got to do with the issue? We're talking, I thought, about -- about Government contracts. People who enter into Government contracts need certainty. They have to know whether that word, subject to appropriations, invalidates the contract or whether they have a valid contract. And a set of principles have come up that are used to decide that. And under that set of principles, money is available to pay for the contract if it's time, purpose, and amount. Okay? That's the principle. And --
 You don't think --
 -- and I don't see anything contrary to that.
 Justice Breyer, one background principle -- and it's reflected, by the way, in the terms of the contracts themselves. One background principle is that funds for inherent Federal functions are not required to be transferred to tribes. And the contracts --
 Well, Mr. Srinivasan, do you say that the contracts that were entered into by IHS and the tribes did somehow contract away Federal -- inherent Federal functions?
 No. They specifically --
 They didn't violate that section, did they? The contracts that we're talking about.
 They specifically did not transfer --
 No. So we're not dealing with that. We're dealing with contracts that didn't violate that section. And you're just saying that some of the lump sum appropriation was diverted by the Government to pay for some kind of core Federal function, not that the contracts violated that provision.
 No. The -- that's correct, Justice O'Connor. What I'm responding to is the suggestion that funds that were allocated by the Secretary to pay for inherent Federal functions were required to be diverted to pay for the indirect costs --
 You're not saying -- you're addressing not what was contracted out, but what funds are available.
 Correct.
 That's where your argument is going.
 Correct. It relates to the funds that are available. And the tribes' position --
 And you rely on the statement in (a) that the -- the only funds that are available are funds that include funds to -- to pay for supportive administrative functions that are otherwise contractable.
 Right. Not funds --
 And not funds that are used to pay for administrative functions that are not contractable.
 Right. We think that funds for inherent Federal functions were taken off -- off the --
 Can I --
 You said that --
 Can I ask you sort of a basic question that I'm having trouble following? As I understand, you're saying 98 percent of the appropriation have been allocated to programs, projects, activities, and so forth that can't be reduced. Now, is there anything in the statute that would have prevented the Secretary from allocating only 96 percent of the budget to those funds?
 Well, there is, Justice Stevens, in the following sense. It's not at all the case that the Secretary had unfettered discretion in composing the allocation scheme in any fiscal year.
 But his budget that he actually worked out with the 98 percent was not mandated by the statute, as I understand.
 In -- in part it was mandated by the statute.
 In part but not in whole.
 Perhaps not in whole --
 Well, that's the point.
 -- but at least in significant part. And let me -- but I think this is significant, and if I can just walk the Court through the process by which the budget is developed and any appropriation ultimately is allocated. The Secretary has always, both before the ISDA and after the ISDA, taken the current year's allocation across programs as a given, as a baseline from which the next year's allocation will be built. And that's reflected in the terms of the statute on pages 14a to 15a of the appendix to the blue brief. There's a provision, 450j-1(b)(2), that says that the amount that's transferred to contractors shall not be reduced by the Secretary in subsequent years except pursuant to certain limited criteria and one of which, the principal one of which, is the reduction in appropriations. But we're not dealing with that in the relevant fiscal years. There was always an increase. And so the Secretary, pursuant to the statute, kept the funding for across programs at least at the level that it was at the previous fiscal year. Now, in addition to that, the Secretary builds two -- two considerations on top. The first is mandatory across-the-board increases for things such as salary COLA's and inflationary adjustments. And that's a standard feature of budgeting, and it's reflected again in the terms of the statute. And that -- I'd point the Court to page 9 of the Government's brief, the gray brief, where we cite a provision, 25 U.S.C. 1680a.
 Is the -- is the nub of what you're trying to tell me is that the 98 percent was, in fact, mandated by a statute?
 It was -- I -- I think in principal part it was mandated by the -- by --
 Principal part, but --
 Well, let --
 Does that mean that there was not enough?
 At least as far --
 They could have made it 97 percent --
 -- insofar as what I've said with respect --
 -- and had enough money --
 Sorry.
 -- to pay these contract obligations.
 No, Justice Stevens.
 See, the thing that troubles me is it seems to me your reading of the statute makes the contractual problem -- provision illusory because they can always allocate funds to all these other projects and say, well, we've already used up the money.
 No, I don't think that they have discretion to do that. And that's what I'm trying to explain. At least with respect to the existing baseline and a mandatory across-the-board increases, it's mandated by the statute that the -- that the Secretary conduct his budgeting allocation process in the way that he's done. With respect to the mandatory across-the-board increases, on page 9 of the Government's brief, 25 U.S.C. 1680a, a provision that relates specifically to the administration of the Self-Determination Act, it requires the Secretary to provide funds to contracting tribes for, quote, cost-of-living increases, closed quote, and, quote, other expenses relating to the provision of health services, closed quote, on the, quote, same basis as such funds are provided to programs and services operated directly. In other words, with respect to mandatory across-the-board increases, the Secretary has to allocate those proportionately amongst contracting tribes and non-contracting tribes. And that leaves the additional set of an increase from one year to the next year that deals with specific targeted items, and principally that would include, for example, staffing of new facilities that come on board during the course of a particular fiscal year. And with respect to those specific targeted items, the critical point is that the contracting tribes often benefit from the addition of those and from the enforcement by the Secretary of those sorts of earmarks. For example, in this particular case, the -- one of the facilities that's at issue is the Stillwell clinic in Oklahoma. That was a new facility that came on board in the early 1990s and for which the -- for which the Cherokee Nation assumed administration of it through a self-determination agreement. Now, the staffing for that facility was specifically earmarked in the Secretary's budget submissions and in -- in Congress' appropriation committee reports. And it, of course, is in the Cherokee Nation's interest to ensure that those earmarks are honored.
 Are you telling me that the committee reports are -- are binding law?
 They're not binding law, Justice Stevens. We fully recognize that. But at the same time, I don't think that what Congress intended to do was to require the Secretary to completely ignore the committee reports.
 No. But you got a conflict apparently between the committee reports and what seems to be pretty clear law, which says we're going to treat these contracts as contracts, not as intergovernmental agreements. And in -- in that conflict, I don't see why contracting principles don't trump the committee reports.
 It's not just the committee reports, Justice Souter. It's the reduction clause. The reduction clause is a part of the statute and no one has ever suggested the reduction clause doesn't inform the proper interpretation of the contract.
 And -- and their -- their argument is that you can pay the contract amount without robbing other tribes of the amounts that the -- that the nonreduction clause refers to. They are saying -- I think they're saying, look, you, the governmental bureaucracy, get squeezed. Yes. And if so, the contract comes first and you have to live with the squeeze and go back to Congress and say, we're doing what you told us and we're getting squeezed out of existence. I think that's what they're saying.
 That is what they're saying, Justice Souter, but with respect to, I think it's incorrect. The Government bureaucracy consists of two separate types of bureaucracy. There's that core bureaucracy that is the inherent Federal functions. And one of their arguments is that the Secretary was required to divest himself of the funds that were necessary to perform those functions.
 No, he's not. But if -- if -- where I'm really coming from, to be honest -- and I'd like -- you might as well reply to what I'm actually -- is why I'm asking these slightly hostile questions. (Laughter.)
 I -- I read here -- look, the question really is was this money like the bureaucracy money. Is it legally speaking an appropriation available, not practically speaking but legally? And here it seems to me, in looking through this somewhat quickly, that you say no, but the Board of Contract Appeals say yes. And so I think in my mind, you know, one group of people who really know about this is the Board of Contract Appeals. So if they're saying that money from a contract point -- a point of normal contract law is legally available, I promise you I'm predisposed to think they're right. So I might as well expose that to you so you can tell me now why I'm wrong or they're wrong or whatever.
 Because, Justice Breyer, I think the core of it is that even if you think that they're right, that these funds are legally available, that's not enough under the ISDA because the ISDA specifically reserves to the Secretary the discretion that he not be required to reduce funding for programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe in order to make funds available to another tribe under this subchapter.
 Well, there is -- is -- the kind -- the money that's available to one tribe can't be taken for the other. But I thought the Board of Contract Appeals was saying taking that into account, there's still enough money left over. Am I wrong about that? I thought you should take money from one tribe to give it to another. What did they think?
 No. They thought -- the -- the board -- the Federal Circuit at least, which echoed the Board of Contract Appeals, thought --
 Well, I'm thinking the Board of Contract Appeals and the Federal Circuit.
 Well, I don't think the Board of -- of Contract Appeals really wrestled directly with where the funds were coming from. They just thought that legal availability would be sufficient. Now, what the Federal Circuit said was that funds for inherent Federal functions are available. And we think that's wrong for the reasons I've said. I don't think those funds ever came into the group of funds that were subject to be transferred to begin with. But even if you thought that they did, I think it's clear that funds for inherent Federal functions are funds for programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe in the sense that one example of a core Federal function --
 No, but if that's true, then everything -- then every penny in the -- in the IHS bureaucracy qualifies. I mean, that swallows the -- that swallows the entire budget.
 Well, let's -- Justice Souter, if I -- if I could, let's look at the particular sources --
 No, no. But I mean, just conceptually isn't that -- isn't that the -- the implication of what you're saying?
 You -- you can't limit it to inherent Government functions. Both the inherent and the noninherent Government functions would fall within this provision --
 Yes.
 -- if you read it as broadly as you've just read it.
 Well, I -- I guess the way I'd like to make the point is to say that the sources of funds that they point to, which include inherent Federal functions and the -- the noninherent Federal function bureaucracy that supports the administration of programs that serve tribes that are directly served by the Federal Government, those two are in fact programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe. With respect to the administrative support --
 On -- on that point -- on that point, in the Federal Circuit Judge Dyke expressed considerable displeasure with the Government because he said three times I said, tell me what existing programs with other tribes would have been reduced if these contract support costs are paid in full. And he said, I asked them again and again and again, and they were unresponsive. So since the Government declined to tell the court what programs -- existing programs with other tribes would have been reduced, mustn't we assume, as I think the Federal Circuit did, that the proof is unavailable and no existing program with other tribes would have been diminished?
 I don't -- I don't think so, Justice Ginsburg. I mean, one straightforward reason why you don't have to take that assumption is that it's not only the Federal Circuit case that's before the Court, it's also the Tenth Circuit case. And there's -- there are declarations in the Tenth Circuit case that specifically assert that diverting funding for -- to pay for the contract support costs of these tribes would have required reducing funds for programs, projects, or activities serving a tribe.
 Now, what does that mean?
 So --
 I mean, one thing is existing contracts, things that are already ongoing, and then another thing is, well, we think that there's a new program that could be good for some tribe. So we're going to put that new program in and say that that steps in front of these contract support costs. Are we talking just about existing programs that -- that the Government has made a commitment to, or are we saying the Government is at liberty to benefit tribes? And so what if the contract support costs are, as a result, diminished? We're still doing good for tribes.
 We're talking about both existing programs and new programs, and with respect to new programs, there's -- it's every bit as likely that those new programs would benefit contracting tribes as noncontracting tribes. And again, one of the new facilities --
 It's strange to talk of reducing -- is -- is not required to reduce funding for a new program. I mean, for a new program, there isn't any funding. How can you reduce the funding for a new program?
 Because --
 That provision makes sense with regard to existing programs, but it doesn't make any sense with regard to proposed programs.
 Well, I don't think that reduce necessarily takes the existing year's appropriation as the baseline. We think that what it takes as the baseline is the current year's appropriation allocation which takes into account increases. And one way to see that is 25 U.S.C. 1680a, which is the provision that I cited earlier that requires the Secretary to apportion mandatory across-the-board increases on a proportionate basis as between contracted programs and noncontracted programs. And what that provision means is that the reduction takes into account those mandatory across-the-board increases from year to year. So in some sense, I think reduce does mean this year's allocation of appropriations as opposed to last year's spending amount.
 Mr. Srinivasan, you -- you alluded a moment ago in -- in answering Justice Ginsburg, I guess, to declarations on file on the Tenth Circuit case that -- that specifically said we would have to reduce funds available for other programs. Did those declarations get specific in the way that her original question was -- was asking about? Did it say -- did the declarations say we will have to reduce the X program for the Navajo Tribe and the Y program for the Apache Tribe and so on, or was it -- did the declarations simply say, as a general matter, we would have to reduce allocations for other tribes?
 Well, they -- they make the point as a general matter, and they also give an example. I think the one example that they give -- and maybe there are more -- is -- is a diabetes program. But I think it's more the general principle --
 Was that a new program or an existing program?
 That's an -- the -- the particular example is an existing program. But I think it's more --
 It seems to me you can interpret those comments as saying we don't -- they did not leave enough room in the budget for the programs we now want to support and our prior contractual obligations.
 You're -- you're speaking with particular respect to the new programs, Justice Stevens?
 Yes. It seems to me that you can interpret what you're saying as the -- as the -- the Government adopting a budget in which there's not enough room for all the programs it wants to support in the current year and continuing to honor the obligations under the existing contracts.
 Well, I don't think that even with respect to the current year there wouldn't be enough money to pay for the complete shortfall in contract support costs. If you look at the figures, the shortfall in contract support costs, for example, in 1997 cumulatively was $82 million, and that's -- that is more than the amount of the appropriation increase from FY 1996 to FY 1997. It's more than the amount that was reserved by the Government for inherent Federal functions. And so even if you accepted that interpretation, it wouldn't be sufficient to fully fund the contract support costs.
 Is there some way to avoid these problems now? Has anything changed?
 Justice O'Connor, Congress changed things by imposing a statutory cap, explicit statutory cap, on contract support cost funding beginning with 1998. It had done so since 1994 for the BIA and it did so beginning in 1998 with respect to IHS.
 Why was there that difference between the BIA that got the statutory caps earlier and not till, was it, 4 years later for the IHS?
 I think the difference lies in the extent to which there was perceived to be a shortfall. My understanding is that there was a shortfall already in BIA programs whereas the shortfall didn't really become evident with respect to the IHS until 1994 and beyond. And that's why you might see the discrepancy between the two. But Congress also acted, by the way, in 1998 in the 1999 Appropriations Act in enacting section 314 of the 1999 Appropriations Act. And I think, if nothing else, section 314 at list -- at least expresses the view of a subsequent Congress that the Secretary's allocation scheme from 1994 to 1997 was legitimate and was fully within his discretion under the ISDA. And under this Court's decisions in Red Lion and its progeny, that determination by a subsequent Congress is at least entitled to great weight in determining what the Secretary appropriately exercised discretion in 1994 through 1997. So even if you thought that there was some doubt on whether the Secretary had carried out his functions consistently with the ISDA, I think Congress' saying later in the 1999 Appropriation Act that its view was that Secretary had done so legitimately should push the Court towards ruling in our favor on the initial interpretation of the ISDA. I want to address really quickly, if I could, the notion that the funds for administrative support for programs that are administered directly by the Federal Government are available. And that would have significant consequences because one of the policies underlying the act is not only to protect the interests of tribes that are currently entered into self-determination contracts, but it's to protect the amounts that are available to tribes that might some day choose to enter into self-determination contracts. And if, under the tribes' view, the Secretary was required to divert the entire amount of the increase in any particular year to contracting tribes or to -- to divert the entire amount of administrative support for -- for noncontracted programs to contracting tribes, the effect of that would be to freeze in place the amounts that were available for potentially contracting tribes in future years. Thank you.
 Mr. Miller, you have about 4 minutes left.
 Justice Stevens, thank you. First, I'd like to address the availability of appropriations clause briefly. That is a term of art with a well-established meaning. This Court in Morissette said that if -- unless there's a contrary direction from Congress that the term of art should not be given its well-established meaning, it controls. And that is the meaning, purpose, time, and amount, that the appropriation is available for the purpose during the time and in the amounts necessary to fully --
 I think they disagree with you about the purpose in respect to the core Government function.
 Secondly, with regard to the core governmental functions, in Blackhawk, the contractor had a settlement with the Veterans Administration. The Veterans Administration had to reprogram. From where? We don't know, but the Veterans Administration had to reprogram and wanted to get approval from the Congress for that reprogramming action. Congress then stepped in but after the payment was due and forbade any reprogramming, and the Court then held when the payment was due, money was legally available and it doesn't matter where it comes from. There is no protection for inherent Federal functions. It may have come from some other hospital budget. It may have come from some other activity of the Veterans Administration. No doubt everything the VA does is important, but it doesn't mean it didn't have a legal obligation to pay the contract. There is no rule that has an IFF exception to the governmental duty to pay, and if there was, it would upset Government contract law deeply as the amicus brief from the National Chamber explains. Secondly, when funds are not available, we know what happens. This Court's decision, Justice Brandeis' decision for the Court, in Sutton explains what happens when funds are not available. There was a line item appropriation of $20,000 for a construction project. We understand that the contractor was on notice. Everything is square. Here, the entire lump sum appropriation was available, and I'd like to give the Court a sense of where the money could have come from, not that the Government had to do it. Just as in Blackhawk, if they chose not to reprogram, that's their right. But then there's a remedy. Where could the money have come from? In 1994, there was slightly under $2 million in a shortfall, just to the Cherokee contractor. No other contractor was apparently shorted. There was up to $98 million in leftover appropriations that year. There was 55 -- $88 million in an increase, up to $88 million in increase every year from $36 million to $88 million. There was $25 million in inherent Federal functions. They couldn't have shaved that by 10 percent to pay this contractor? Not that they had to. They could have taken some of it from there, some of it from the leftover, some of it from the increase, some of it from the offices at headquarters and area offices. That was their decision. But the contractor didn't take the risk that the Secretary would say, at the end of the day, I've decided to allocate 100 percent of my money this way, and by golly, there's nothing left for you. No contractor takes that risk in dealing with the Government, and surely, a tribal contractor with a mandatory contract set forth in the statute doesn't take that risk either. There is no limitation to the Secretary's theory in this case. The Secretary's theory means that we come, the contractors come, after the allocation of the Secretary. Well, the Secretary could, in a reduction year, decide to allocate the entire reduction to the contracts and enhance even his own Federal bureaucracy and programs serving other tribes and say, now I've made my decision and I've made my judgment. I don't have enough money to pay you. There's no limit here on contract support costs. It could be the secretarial amount. They could zero out these contracts and say it's practical availability. And we've decided there isn't enough money to deal with all of the health care needs in the country, so we're going to deal with the ones we operate and you come last. Now, that's not what the -- that's not what the statute permits. That sort of interpretation would lead to an absurdity. With regard to the Tenth Circuit decision, Justice, you asked a question about the declarations in the Tenth Circuit. There was a declaration in the Tenth Circuit, but all it had was a conclusory statement, to have reprogrammed anything would have caused reductions in programs serving other tribes. Now, that is not sufficient proof to withstand summary judgment, and it's certainly not sufficient proof to establish summary judgment. So for all these reasons, we believe the Tenth Circuit decision should be reversed and the Federal Circuit decision affirmed. Unless the Court has more questions.
 Thank you, Mr. Miller.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens.
 We'll hear argument in Jackson against the Birmingham Board of Education. Mr. Dellinger.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Under the decision below, title IX stands alone as the only major civil rights statute that would permit retaliation against those who complain that the law is being violated. There are at least a half a dozen anti-discrimination laws that do not contain a separate retaliation provision, and every one of them has been found to prohibit retaliation as one kind of discrimination. There's a reason for that. Anti-discrimination laws simply can't be effective if threats of retaliation are allowed to chill those who would seek to bring their institutions into compliance.
 Of course, the question is whether -- that -- that may be true, but there would be an administrative remedy. The question here is a private cause of action for damages.
 That is true, Justice Kennedy.
 Even -- even assuming the -- the validity of your premise, you still have another step.
 I understand that other step, and I think that was largely resolved in Cannon v. the City of Chicago, a decision which this Court upheld a right of action to enforce title IX, even though there was also administrative remedies available and which was validated by Congress, as this Court -- every member of this Court recognized in -- in Sandoval.
 I thought -- I thought that Cannon -- we've -- we've allowed Cannon to stay on the books, but I thought we have sworn off the kind of creation of -- of implied remedies that Cannon exemplifies.
 In this case, there is no doubt that the two established principles together that are settled support this cause of action. The first is that there is a cause of action to enforce title IX. That's Cannon through Congress, through Sandoval, through -- your opinion in Sandoval acknowledges that Cannon is solid law and, the second point, that the statute itself is violated. Title IX is violated by retaliatory action against Coach Jackson. He's -- and -- and this is an important part of title IX because, particularly here, people like Coach Jackson need to come forward because students are often minors. They're not in the best position to know the budgets. It is people like Coach Jackson who make it work, and indeed, I think what is recognized about the -- about the cause of action for retaliation is that it is very important to enable people to bring their institutions into compliance without resorting to litigation.
 It's very -- it's very useful, I'm sure, but it -- it could be very disruptive also, I am sure. If I were -- if I were a coach, one of the first things -- especially a coach of a women's team in high school, one of the first things I would do would be to complain about not -- not getting enough facilities. This would make it a lot more difficult to fire me whether -- whether I'm a lousy coach or not. You -- you would have to think twice before you fire me because I would have a retaliation claim.
 Justice Scalia, the burden, of course, is on the plaintiff to demonstrate causation. And you should take great comfort from the fact, the Court can take great comfort from the fact that retaliation has been established as a violation of all of the major civil rights statutes, going back to 30 years to title VI --
 Some of them specifically provide for retaliation, don't they?
 That is correct.
 Why do they do that if, as you assert, the mere word discrimination embraces it?
 Well, Congress has taken a different approach. In some cases, there would be a textual problem. Title VII, for example, speaks of discrimination based on such individual's race or national origin. Title -- and -- and therefore, it might need a specific retaliation provision. Title IX speaks upon -- about discrimination on the basis of sex. And here I think to -- to allay your concern about the coach, we have had -- title IX's retaliation provision has been the established law. It was the law at the time Congress -- it was understood, at the time Congress enacted title IX, that the identical wording of title VI had been construed by the administrative agency to include a cause of action for retaliation. Congress enacted title IX against the background of the Sullivan decision, which had recognized that discrimination can include retaliation. So that it comes as no surprise that every court of appeals that has addressed this issue has found that there's retaliation under title IX. In over 30 years, there -- at most we can find 140 reported cases in the Federal system where there is a claim for retaliation under title IX, and under title IX and all of the other discrimination provisions, courts have found it perfectly satisfactory to work out the causation requirements and -- in -- in dealing with retaliation cases. Now, here, what the respondent did is they discharged the coach who was seeking equal treatment for girls. When it singled Coach Jackson out for adverse treatment, it was discriminating, and when it did so, because he was seeking equal treatment for girls, it was discriminating on the basis of sex.
 Do you think that it -- it is a reasonable description of what happened -- he was fired for complaining about his girls' team not getting enough facilities -- that he was, on the basis of sex, excluded from participation in, denied benefits of, or subjected to discrimination under an education program?
 Absolutely.
 Do you think that -- that remotely describes what happened to this coach?
 Absolutely. First of all, the -- the court of appeals correctly says -- in the petition appendix at 3a, the court of appeals says we assume for the purposes of this appeal that the board retaliated against Jackson for complaining about perceived title IX violations. But for the discrimination on the basis of sex, he would not have complained, and he not -- had he not made a complaint about sex discrimination, he wouldn't have lost his position. He is denied the benefit of coaching in the program. He's denied the ability to participate in this federally funded program as a coach, and he is discriminated against by being singled out for retaliation. And this is not a case in which -- that has concern -- I mean, Justice Kennedy raised the question about this being a funding case, and I understand the special sensitivity that the Court has about rules that are based upon spending requirements where you want to be sure that States understand what they're agreeing to when they accept the Federal funds. This is not a case in which it could not have been anticipated when those funds were accepted. At that time, at the time these funds were accepted, which would have been about 1999 or 2000, title IX's ban on sex discrimination was itself, of course, universally known. Retaliation was understood to be part and parcel of that. We had had 30 years where both the Department of Education and --
 But -- but that's again the question of the substantive scope of the provision, and that's different from whether there was a congressional intent to create a private cause of action for this sort of violation. And was it -- Virginia Bankshares and so forth tells us that this is not the heyday of prior cause of actions anymore. You have to show that there's a congressional intent in the Spending Clause to create a private cause of action for damages.
 I think the Court --
 And that's -- that's quite separate from --
 Yes. I -- I --
 -- from this -- from the question of substantive liability.
 I understand that. Here, first of all, when Congress acted, unlike the earlier time when it passed title VI, when Congress passed title IX, it was a background in the law from Sullivan v. Little Hunting Park that -- that retaliation was considered a part of discrimination. The title VI regulations were themselves well known based on identical language, virtually verbatim language. It provided for retaliation. And moreover, this Court as recently as the Davis case, Franklin and Davis, and in the North Haven case has found that employment discrimination, sexual harassment by teachers and peer-on-peer sexual harassment all come within title IX and have, therefore, agreed that Cannon v. the City of -- v. the University of Chicago creates that cause of action. Now, this case is actually a lot easier than Davis, even taking into account the concerns that -- that you and other Justices expressed there, because this is not a case where liability is being imposed, you know, for the acts of third parties like students over whom you may have limited control. This is deliberately undertaken actions by the responsible officials acting intentionally. It's not a novel concept the way one could argue that peer-on-peer sexual harassment was as a part of discrimination. But it's been accepted for more than 30 years by the responsible Federal agency.
 Yes, but it's separate enough from discrimination that in other statutes, although Congress does create a cause of action for discrimination, it goes out of its way to create a separate cause of action for retaliation. It's sufficiently separate, and if it is that sufficiently separate, it doesn't seem to me that you could clearly say that -- that when the State signed on to receiving Federal funds under title IX, they should have known that this door to litigation was being opened to them. Yes, litigation for -- for discrimination against -- against female athletes, but not -- not discrimination suits alleging retaliation. That's a whole, new area.
 Justice Scalia, with -- with all due respect, I don't think there's any way, when the district accepted these funds, that they could have reasonably relied on the assumption that they would be free to retaliate against people who tried to comply --
 Well, but there was -- there was -- let's go back to this for just a moment -- an administrative remedy available for retaliation expressly under the regs?
 That is correct.
 And did this petitioner seek an administrative remedy at all?
 He did not seek an administrative remedy. He went through the school system itself at every level. He went through five different levels, following the chain of command.
 What would the administrative remedy have allowed here --
 Well --
 -- had it been sought?
 Here, as in Franklin, as in Davis, as in Cannon v. the University of Chicago, as in every one of this Court's title IX cases, indeed, as in all of its title VI cases involving Federal funds with race, you can call this to attention to the office of civil rights of the relevant agency and they can begin an inquiry. Ultimately they have the authority of the draconian sanction of cutting off the funds to the --
 Do they have any other sanction? Because the notion of an administrative remedy ordinarily would be a remedy for the individual who's complaining. But as I understand it, this administrative process, this detailed administrative process, leads only to one sanction, the one you have described as draconian.
 That is correct.
 So that's it. It would not have permitted a restoration of the job to the --
 That is correct.
 -- petitioner.
 That is not part of the -- the administrative process is only about institutional funding, which is why the Court has consistently upheld the right to bring these actions for what are violations of the statute itself.
 Well, if we don't accept -- let's assume, just for the sake of argument, that -- that we're having trouble accepting the -- the analysis that it is a violation of the statute in the statute's own terms. You then made the argument that, in fact, you should recognize retaliation as a claim because in the context of -- of school students and so on, if you don't allow retaliation, the teachers are not going to blow the whistle, and if the teachers blow the whistle, the statute is going to be a dead letter.
 That is --
 So -- so the -- the argument is you -- you should recognize this as a necessity. That, it seems to me, still goes back to Justice O'Connor's question. Why do we have to recognize a private cause of action as opposed to the government allowing an administrative remedy? And I thought you were leading up to saying the administrative remedy simply isn't effective because it's so draconian that, in fact, they don't impose it, or for some other reason. So my question is, is there an argument to say that the administrative remedy simply is not good enough to preclude -- to -- to deter retaliation and that's why you've got to have a private cause of action?
 That -- that is absolutely right.
 What's -- what are the facts? What's the empirical evidence for that?
 Well --
 Do you know if administrative sanctions have been imposed under title IX against schools?
 Well, I'm sure there have been some instances in which there have been administrative sanctions under title IX. And I don't -- I do not have figures on those, Justice O'Connor. But let me --
 Have funds --
 -- let me suggest --
 -- have funds -- Mr. Dellinger, have funds ever been withdrawn from any school because of a violation of --
 Not to my knowledge.
 -- title IX?
 But I think --
 That could be because --
 -- I actually have --
 -- the sanction is so draconian that nobody in his right mind is not going to rehire the coach. Of course, they're going to rehire. I -- I find it hard to believe why a draconian sanction is ineffective.
 Well, if it's never -- I -- I --
 It seems to me it's -- it's overwhelmingly effective. You tell the school you either rehire the coach or we're cutting off your money.
 Justice --
 Is it hard to decide what they're going to do?
 I do have an answer, first, for Justice Ginsburg's question from Ms. Greensberger. The sanction has never been imposed under title IX of cutting off funds. And it --
 And I can't imagine anyone who would want such a sanction. Which doesn't help --
 That is certainly not what --
 -- the girls on the team.
 -- Coach -- Coach Jackson would have sought, and -- and because that process is not one that's responsive to the individual case -- if you're down in Birmingham, Alabama, the idea that there is some office that has control over Federal funds that's never imposed a sanction, the fact of the matter is -- and it's the reason --
 Well, you're saying the coach cares more about it than the Government does?
 That may well be the case, absolutely. And Coach Jackson --
 Well, if -- if the Government is charged with -- with just spending the funds and doesn't think that this is worth its time, why should there be a private cause of action --
 Because --
 -- when -- when a private cause of action is harder for us to imply than it -- than it is to an administrative remedy?
 Because in this case people like Coach Jackson -- it's hard enough for Coach Jackson to come forward. If he's not able to -- if he's not protected and able to come forward, if retaliation is possible, then you can't expect the -- the teenagers themselves to carry this burden. And in fact, it's the reason this Court recognizes a private cause of action in Franklin and in Davis and in Cannon itself, that you're not going to protect the whistle blower and they're not going to be able to come forward. And it's not just whistle blowers, Justice Kennedy. It's people that want to make their institutions comply and when those efforts at compliance result in penalties against them. It has not led to an excessive amount of litigation, but it has been very effective in giving people comfort to know that they can't be retaliated against. And -- and I -- I understand the -- going to the necessity, but I do think I'm very comfortable with the statute because it is a form of discrimination on the basis of sex. It is part and parcel. The history of discrimination, on which title VI drew, was that firing people from their jobs is what you did when they complained about discrimination, when they tried to vote, when they tried to enroll their students in schools, and it is part and parcel of that discrimination. And it is discrimination against Coach Jackson for his actions on behalf of sex. Thank you.
 Mr. --
 I'll reserve the balance of my time.
 Mr. Gornstein, do you have any light to shed on the extent to which administrative sanctions have ever been imposed against schools and -- and the feasibility of going that route?
 Administrative sanction has never been imposed under title IX.
 They have been under title VI?
 There has been one case in which an administrative sanction was imposed under title VI, Justice Kennedy. It -- the agency does have some flexibility to attempt to get voluntary resolutions that are short of the sanction, the final sanction, but --
 Do you take the position that what occurred here can amount to a direct violation of the statute as discrimination?
 We do, Justice -- Justice O'Connor. I'm sorry. Retaliation against a person because that person has complained about sex discrimination under title IX is itself discrimination within the meaning of title IX. And that conclusion flows from four considerations, beginning with the Court's decision critically in Sullivan because in that case, the Court held that a person subjected to retaliation because he complained about racial discrimination against his lessee could sue under section 1982's prohibition, which only prohibits racial discrimination. Against the backdrop of that decision in Sullivan, Congress would have understood its prohibition against sex discrimination to afford comparable protection against retaliation. So a person who is subjected --
 Why would Congress then in some statutes expressly cover retaliation and in others not? I mean, that's a little odd, isn't it?
 It is, Justice O'Connor, but the explanation for that for -- in title VII, for example, is that the core prohibitions in title VII refer to discrimination based on such individual's race, sex, or national origin, and that such individual's language rules out the kind of retaliation claim we are talking about here.
 It rules out this one, but it doesn't rule out the main -- look it, this is a weird kind of retaliation claim. Usually the retaliation claim is the person who has been discriminated against complains about the discrimination, and for that complaint, the person who was discriminated against is demoted or not promoted, or whatever. That's -- that's the classic retaliation claim. And that classic claim is surely covered by -- on the basis of that person's sex. If --
 If it's based on the fact that the -- that the person is complaining about sex discrimination and not on the sex of the complainer, it's exactly the same theory of discrimination that we have here, Justice Scalia. And that theory of discrimination was recognized in the Sullivan decision. Discrimination occurs when there is retaliation against a person because he's complaining about racial discrimination.
 What was the date of the Sullivan case?
 It was 3 years before Congress enacted section -- I think it was '68 -- '69. I'm sorry. '69.
 '69.
 It was '69, Justice Scalia.
 And -- and you think that we take the same approach to implied causes of action today that we took in 1969?
 You do not, Justice Scalia, when you are starting afresh, but --
 And we certainly did not with a Spending Clause case.
 That's true, Justice Kennedy. But to answer Justice Scalia's question, first, you operate in the legal context in which Congress was operating at the time, and Congress would have understood -- and this Court has twice relied on the Sullivan decision in interpreting title IX, once in deciding that there was a private right of action and once in deciding that the private right of action included a claim for damages.
 I don't know what case it is, but one of our cases, the argument was precisely made that the statute before us had been enacted by Congress before we had set our face against implied causes of action, and therefore, we should interpret that statute the way we used to in 1969, and we rejected that argument. We said that our new rule, as to when you find implied causes of action, will be applied to all statutes, whether they were enacted by a Congress that -- that thought we would go skipping along forever as we did in 1969 or -- or not. And -- and that's what you're asking us to do here.
 Justice --
 Just because Congress in -- in the -- at the time this statute was enacted believed in the existence of a Supreme Court that would readily find implied causes of action, we -- we have to do that for all these old statutes.
 Let -- let me talk about the cases that I think the principle that you're talking about emerges from. One is the Central Bank case, and what you were asked to do there was to add the words, aiders and abetters, to the statute. We're not asking you to add words to this statute. We're asking you to interpret the words that are there --
 But what about Virginia --
 -- in light of the relevant context.
 What about Virginia Bankshares?
 I'm -- I'm not sure about Virginia Bankshares, but I don't think it -- it states a principle. The other case that I was thinking about, Justice Kennedy, is the -- is the Sandoval case. And again, there somebody was asking you to afford a private right of action for something that the statute did not itself prohibit. And what we are saying here is, interpret this statute in light of the legal context that Congress had it, which is --
 Well, it -- it's arguable except that Mr. Jackson was not discriminated against because of his gender.
 That's correct. But this statute does not require discrimination because of such individual's sex. It require --
 -- exactly like title VII, but --
 It's -- it's written exactly not like title VII, Justice O'Connor, and it's written far more like section 1982, which was at issue at Sullivan, which doesn't have a such individual's limitation. And in -- and section 1982 was interpreted to mean discrimination on the basis of race in depriving people of interests of property violates that statute and affords a private right of action to the victim of retaliation. And so too here. And a person who is victimized by retaliation because that person has been subjected before -- because he complained about sex discrimination is a victim of discrimination within the meaning of this statute.
 And that's where you hang. You -- you really think Congress, when it enacted title IX, paid close attention and said -- instead of saying no person in the United States shall on the basis of that person's sex be excluded from participation, you think somebody had -- had suggested that language, and they said, oh, no, no, no, that would make it too narrow. We have to take out that person's. I -- I don't -- it doesn't strike me as a -- as an obvious import of not including the word that person's sex. It's a very natural way to write it: no person in the United States shall on the basis of sex.
 But this is -- it opens it up to this interpretation, and then you have to look at all the relevant considerations. Inserting the words, such individual's, would foreclose that kind of retaliation claim, and it's not here. And so it's -- then you have to look at all the other relevant considerations, including Sullivan, including the fact that this is of vital importance to promoting the purposes of the act, including the fact that the agencies responsible for enforcing this provision have both interpreted -- the key agencies have interpreted it to encompass protection against retaliation, and including the fact that there's absolutely no legitimate interest that a -- a recipient has in retaliating against somebody simply because he's filed a title IX sex discrimination complaint.
 Mr. Gornstein, what implication would there be, if we took the view of the circuit here, for Federal employment? Title VII does have a discrete retaliation provision, but it doesn't with respect to Federal employees, if I understand.
 That's correct. In -- it -- we -- we have taken the position that there is, based on a textual argument within the Federal sector provision, a basis for finding a retaliation prohibition over and above the use of discrimination. We have not taken that position with respect to the -- to some other statutes. So we do think this is a statute-by-statute analysis and that you just can't adopt an automatic principle that because there's an anti-discrimination provision, it automatically always picks up retaliation protection. You have to look at it on a statute-by-statute basis. And here, though, all the relevant considerations, including Sullivan, including the need for this kind of protection to further the purposes of the statute, including the agencies' interpretation of this statute which, by the way, does provide fair notice that this was prohibited, included in -- I think I wanted to get back to Justice Kennedy's question about the Spending Clause. What the Spending Clause does not require is that it specifically refer to retaliation any more than it required that it specifically refer to peer-on-peer harassment. What it does require, though, is fair notice, and that fair notice is supplied by the Sullivan decision, this Court's cases saying that Sullivan is an important backdrop principle against which title IX was enacted, and finally the regulations themselves, which specifically forbid retaliation.
 Are punitive damages available under title IX?
 I'm sorry. Punitive damages would not be available against a municipality or against a -- but it could be available against some other private recipients.
 Thank you, Mr. Gornstein. Mr. Thomas.
 Justice Stevens, may it please the Court: Justice O'Connor, I would like to respond to the question that you raised immediately. I can't think of any school board lawyer who is called by his superintendent and told that I had a letter from OCR and they want to know why you aren't doing this and that who would not be in that superintendent's office that moment because when OCR comes in, they canvas everything. I mean, and as a part of negotiating and their investigative teams, they're lay people. They're not lawyers. They come in demanding, and what they prepare for compliance, I can't even begin to articulate how overreaching it is. And so I say I wanted you to --
 How often has OCR come to the school district in question under title IX? There are many statutes that --
 And I would want to suggest --
 -- OCR administers.
 In 1996, we had a conclusion of an OCR title IX investigation because it dealt with boys' football as it related to related sports offered for girls. So we -- we know about OCR, and they're in Atlanta. They are about 167 miles away and when -- and when they come, they come, Your Honors. If I may, I'd like to get right now to what I had raised as the issue here, and that's whether or not an implied private right of action under title IX for retaliation for petitioner who himself says that he's not a victim of discrimination, but merely an advocate. He's an advocate of gender equity, and we say no.
 How does he differ -- how does he differ from the renter in Sullivan who was complaining about the refusal to sell or lease property to African Americans? He wanted to lease his property, and as a result, he was thrown out of the club. And this Court said he could maintain that suit.
 Justice Ginsburg, I offer this one observation. Under 1982, there is not a corollary administrative remedy. So in the Sullivan situation, the only advocate available at that time was the owner of the home. And -- but I would comment that as he continued in his litigation, he continued to advocate. Under title IX, as we have discussed, for the advocate is the phone call, the toll-free call to OCR and express your concerns and your issues about what's happening. And we find significance in that because the ultimate benefit is for the designated class, which would be the basketball team. In a private lawsuit filed by Mr. Jackson, the damage award goes directly to him. If he's successful in getting injunctive relief, it goes only to him. In other words, school board, you can't retaliate or you're enjoined from retaliating against him in the future, but nothing from that Federal court would go to benefit the girls' basketball team.
 Well, what -- what do you make of the -- the point that Mr. Dellinger stressed and others have stressed that, in fact, there is no administrative remedy in the real world? It's -- it's -- there -- there have never -- there has never been an instance in which funds have been withheld.
 Well, again, Justice Souter, no, the funds have not been terminated. But I can only share with you my experiences with dealing with these people.
 May I ask you with respect to that, is OCR so different from other agencies that have to pick and choose because they simply don't have the resources to enforce? Now, how often does OCR, in fact, go in and investigate? How many times do they say, well, that's low priority for us, girls' soccer or girls' basketball, and we have bigger fish to fry?
 Justice Ginsburg, the only thing that I can say is that on my watch, the number one priority is to keep OCR out. So -- so therefore --
 But that wasn't my question. My question is of the universe of complaints that are made under title IX, how many does OCR actually follow up, or isn't it strapped for resources so that it can't, however much it may want to, come in the way you described?
 Well, Your Honor, that was something that was recognized in Cannon. I -- I think that was cited in several of the footnotes.
 And that was the very reason for recognizing a private right of action because the -- the requirement, the anti-discrimination requirement, would be a dead letter if you didn't have people who could enforce it.
 But -- but again, stay mindful. Geraldine Cannon, though, she said, I did not get admission to the -- the med school because of my sex, and she is clearly within the proviso of no discrimination on the basis of sex. So --
 Yes, but the -- the argument that's being raised is whether we're talking about the person who is listed in the statute as the primary beneficiary of the anti-discrimination statute or whether we're talking about the teacher who blows the whistle and so on -- the -- the argument is unless you allow this teacher or this whistle blower to -- to bring the private action, your statute is a dead letter, that the -- that if -- if -- once you recognize a private action, you've either got to recognize this kind of private action or you can forget the whole thing. That's the argument, and -- and so simply to say, well, they're not within the -- the primary ambit of benefit of the statute is -- is not to the point of the argument.
 Justice Souter, let me offer this in two ways. One, it's not realistic. In -- in other words, when -- when you have a scenario about the private cause of action, teachers aren't -- I mean, these parents and -- and the -- and especially in Birmingham, we have an athletic director at the school. We have a director of athletics for the whole school system. And so that -- that's not realistic, I mean, because at the end of the day, the administration is very conscientious about all of its programs.
 Well, that's -- to say trust me is -- is not an answer. Cannon is one thing, a woman in her 30's. A sixth-grader who is told she can't play on a team because there's none for girls is hardly similarly situated and the law won't be enforced as to her unless you have someone who is best positioned to know what is going on, who is the coach.
 But, Justice Ginsburg, we get back to the point who really benefits because -- and especially in this scenario, if the advocate sues and receives the monetary damages, that goes to the advocate.
 The -- the point is if you say to the school, you cannot retaliate against someone because a complaint has been made, that's a powerful incentive for the school not to retaliate against someone and to do something about the discrimination.
 Well, but again, though, Justice Ginsburg, the other side of that would be when under the spending legislation, the school board had a right to know what the terms and conditions of the financial assistance would be, and I respectfully submit to you that there was nowhere on the landscape that --
 Why wasn't it in the regulations of the agency spelled out rather clearly -- the -- the agency that says, Congress has told us to implement this statute, here are our regulations and our regulations are you don't retaliate?
 But that's a part of the complaint and investigatory process. Now, Justice Ginsburg --
 The regulations didn't say anything about a private cause of action, did it?
 No, it did not.
 And the statute didn't say anything about a private cause of action.
 It's not on the face.
 But the regulation did tell the school not to retaliate in effect. Tell me, does the record disclose what happened to the petitioner, Jackson? What -- what has been the result of all this? Does the record tell us that?
 No, it does not, Justice O'Connor. And -- and again, it's on a motion to dismiss, and obviously, once it was --
 Does it tell us that he was removed as coach?
 Yes.
 Does the record tell us that?
 It -- it does say that he was relieved.
 Can I ask you a legal question, nothing to do with, you know, practicalities?
 Yes.
 But suppose you go back to the very old, bad days of the 1950's in the South, the '60's. They pass some civil rights legislation. A lot of legislation was passed in the '60's. Now, under that civil rights legislation, imagine an individual had been kept out of a restaurant or he'd been treated physically badly, not because of his race. He was white, but he was associating with people who were black. And they both go into the restaurant and they both are refused service. Maybe they're beaten up. I mean, both of them. Now, can the white individual bring a lawsuit under the -- the civil rights statute? I've always thought the answer to that question is, of course, he can. Would you -- do you think it's the contrary answer?
 Justice Breyer, in that context --
 Yes.
 -- I -- I would say yes.
 Yes, of course.
 But again --
 So therefore --
 Is this a civil rights statute that provides for a private cause of action? I -- I want to know what the hypothetical is.
 I'd -- I'd like to -- I'm thinking of various civil rights statutes which make it unlawful to describe -- to -- to discriminate. And now, I agree with you on that answer. The white person could bring a lawsuit on the basis of someone else's race because he's being discriminated against not because of his own race, but because he's being -- he's associated with people who are being discriminated against. I agree with your answer. And so my question is if that's so and if we have a long history here of the words, on the basis of sex, including retaliation not on the basis of my sex, but retaliation on the basis of someone else's sex -- that's what I've complained of -- why isn't this the same thing And to get out my whole question -- there are two parts -- why isn't this the same thing? And the second part is, because I think it is the same thing -- the second part is once it is included in 1981 -- in -- is it 1681(a)?
 Yes.
 Once we include this in 1681(a), that's the end of this case because Sandoval then supports the other side. It doesn't support you. All right. That's my question.
 Justice Breyer, don't we have to consider at some point in time what the congressional intent was?
 Well, yes.
 And again -- and I submit to you --
 So you -- you go ahead. I'm doing it purely as a matter of logic. I'm saying the old civil rights cases make clear it doesn't have to be on the basis of your own race. History makes clear that retaliation on the basis of someone else's race does fit within -- or gender does fit within 1681, and then that's the end of the case. So I would like your response to that logic.
 And I would want to submit to you interveningly you have had the passing of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. So everybody now has access to Congress. The whole spectrum of American society is in Congress. So if Congress is being well represented, when it passes the law in 1972, as it did here, it had a different perspective on it. Going back to 1969, some things were foreclosed to some of the citizens of the United States. So, obviously, the scenario of someone advocating, like in Sullivan, would make sense. But I submit to you respectfully, that's not the case now. Over there in Congress is where this debate needs to be, and on the face of this statute, it's not there. Retaliation is not there. If I may, though, Justice Breyer, let me also add as a practical consideration --
 Of course, you say it's not there, but the agencies interpreting the statute thought it was there. Isn't that correct?
 But -- but that's an -- an investigatory -- the administrative enforcement scenario.
 But it's the --
 No, but their reading of the statute was that the word discrimination included a retaliation claim. That's the kind of regulations they drafted on the basis of their understanding of what Congress intended by using the word -- the words in this statute.
 But don't we go -- Justice Stevens, don't we go back to Sandoval? Can you in a regulation do more than what the statute requires?
 You cannot use the regulation that goes beyond the meaning of the statute. That's what that holds. But a regulation interpreting what the statute itself provides is in a different ball park. And that's what I understand these regulations to have done, to say what the agencies thought the statute itself meant.
 But -- but again, that's retaliation after someone has filed a complaint with the appropriate office.
 Well -- I mean, Sandoval is very clear. It's a very clear opinion in my view. Very clear. And the key language I thought is, the language statutes that focus on the person regulated rather than individuals protected create no implication of an intent to confer the private right. So they're looking at disparate impact and disparate impact, according to the majority -- I was in the dissent -- did not intend to protect the person discriminated against, but was a way of regulating people so they wouldn't intentionally discriminate. I can understand that. But I apply the same -- I didn't agree with it, but I can understand it. The -- the -- I apply the same reasoning here. The reasoning here is that this retaliation thing is not trying to protect university behavior one whit more than the whole underlying thing is trying to protect university behavior. This is about victims. Retaliation and being fired is about victims. And so given Sandoval, then we have the history, we have the language, and we have that sentence from Sandoval. And all that suggests -- it goes into 1681(a), in which case Sandoval says, a private right of action, given Cannon, would be inferred. Now, what's -- what's -- that's how -- I'm tracing out the logic of the thing. So I want to see what you say.
 Well, Justice Breyer, on the face of the statute, I just can't get there. I apologize for that, respectfully, but -- but I can't. And Justice O'Connor, as a follow-up, interestingly enough, in a case on all fours in 1995, Holt v. Lewis, the United States District Dourt for the Northern District of Birmingham -- for the Northern District of Alabama made very clear that an implied private right of action was not cognizable under title IX, and that the regulation was not a basis to follow it. And -- and I submit to you on that basis, that in Birmingham, at very least, because the case was affirmed by the Eleventh Circuit and this Court denied cert in 1997, so anyone who would go --
 We -- we can't -- you don't base your argument on giving some legal effect to denial of certiorari --
 No, no, I don't, Justice O'Connor.
 Thank you.
 But -- but to say -- I was trying to emphasize was the notice and the mind set of the board when it accepted these Federal funds. It had no way of anticipating that retaliation --
 It had never anticipated a private right of action, even though it read the Cannon opinion, which was written some 20 years ago? Maybe more than that. I don't remember.
 Justice Cannon, your opinion there is going to be around for a long time. The scholars are going to have to debate it for years.
 There were some later cases that cast a good deal of doubt on whether we would apply Cannon anymore.
 But Congress itself has adopted the rule set forth in Cannon.
 But -- but if I may, but then Justice Rehnquist cautioned very clearly that the Court -- in his concurring opinion, that the Court in the future should be extremely reluctant to imply a cause of action absent such specificity on the part of the legislative branch. And that just speaks volumes to me.
 It said in this statute we do, having in mind that title VI would be interpreted in the identical way --
 Yes, ma'am.
 -- title VII -- VI proscribing race discrimination in all Federal programs. So it said these statutes aimed at race discrimination, sex discrimination do have a -- a private right of action, and that was the holding of this Court.
 Yes, ma'am. Well, but -- but again, it goes -- goes back to -- but would that include retaliation? And -- and --
 Well, it seems to me that if you're talking about the sixth grade soccer team, realistically the only one who is going to know anything -- enough and be brave enough to complain will be the teacher. And if you cut the teacher out, then forget it. You have nice words on paper and they'll never be enforced.
 But, Justice Ginsburg, that teacher could easily, if they don't get a positive response from the administration, they can call OCR.
 And OCR says, as it usually does, we're too busy. Sorry.
 No. They -- no --
 Congress didn't give us enough money to do the job.
 Do we know that? I mean, do we have any idea how effective the enforcement of OCR is? Just because they haven't cut off funds --
 I -- I --
 -- they may well not have cut off funds because anybody who gets a directive from them will hop to it.
 Justice Scalia, that's exactly it. I mean, I have firsthand knowledge that when they call, we're supposed to jump. It's no doubt about it.
 And do they call more than infrequently?
 All the time. And -- and the other side of that coin --
 This is your personal testimony.
 Yes, ma'am. Yes, it is. (Laughter.)
 And -- and Justice --
 There is -- there is much testimony on the other side that says we call and call and they don't come.
 Well, I've been in educational law now almost 27 years, representing both teachers and school boards. So I have firsthand knowledge. I mean -- and I've experienced it both at the secondary level and higher ed. I mean, when they come in, they come in.
 How many title IX complaints in your -- in your experience? You mentioned one. Is there any other?
 Two.
 Two? In how many years?
 In 26.
 Two in 20-something years.
 Yes, ma'am. But they're all memorable. (Laughter.)
 They're all -- thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Thomas. Mr. Newsom.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: I'd like to address, if I may, several concerns that have been raised during the -- the preceding arguments. One is to clarify some things about the scope of the administrative remedy. The other side, with respect, wants you to think that without the implied right of action for damages and fees, whistle blowers are left out in the cold. That is not true. The administrative remedy -- it's not just about funding termination. 34 C.F.R. 106.3 says that the OCR may use any remedy that it deems necessary. The OCR, as we say in our brief, has itself touted its flexible approach to enforcement which includes, among other things, as this Court noted in Gebser, citing back to its earlier -- pardon me -- decision in North Haven, individualized relief in appropriate circumstances. So the point, as Senator Bayh himself noted on the floor of the Senate, is that it is the threat of -- of funding termination. So while the OCR is wielding the club of funding termination, they can extract or leverage individualized relief in appropriate cases.
 Do we -- do we have any -- any empirical evidence as to -- as to what they have thus leveraged?
 None that I am aware of, Your -- Your Honor, but --
 The -- the other side says, look, dead letter. What do we know about such life as there may be in the letter?
 Well -- well, I will, I assume, perhaps foolishly, defer to the Solicitor General's office to tell you what -- what the DOJ has and hasn't done. What I can tell you is that -- that the DOJ manual that the other side cites throughout its briefs expressly encourages agencies, when enforcing these -- these things, to leverage even damage awards on behalf of individual claimants. So I can tell you that, as a matter of policy, this is far from a dead letter.
 You -- you don't concede the point that it is the role of this Court to determine whether agencies are inefficient or not --
 Of course not.
 -- and if they are inefficient to -- to raise up private attorneys general to -- to fill the void?
 Of course not, Justice Scalia, and -- and the Court knows very well from my brief that our position is that when you're talking about implied rights of action, this Court has made clear, in the cases leading up to Sandoval, culminating in Sandoval, that these sorts of policy considerations really are not relevant.
 All right. If they're not relevant, do you think that the regulation which provides -- do you think it's unlawful?
 We do not contest the validity of the regulation.
 Okay. If you don't contest the validity of it and you think it's lawful, do you think it's doing something other than interpreting 1681(a)?
 Absolutely, Your Honor.
 What -- what is it doing?
 It -- section 100.7(e), the regulation upon which Jackson chiefly relies, we readily concede is a valid, effectuating 902 regulation, but all -- all it does by its text -- and its structure makes clear all it does -- is to govern the internal processes of official OCR investigations. It does not go further than that. This Court in Sandoval was very clear that it was -- that it was only authoritative interpretations of a statute's terms that can be enforced pursuant to that statute's implied right of action. Another point I want to make about the administrative remedy. Justice Ginsburg asked whether funds had ever been withdrawn, and even there, again, if the answer is no, the point is not whether funds have been withdrawn, but that as Senator Bayh himself noted, that the threat of funds is where the heavy lifting is done in administrative enforcement. Another point about administrative enforcement is whether or not there are sufficient resources. That, obviously, was a valid concern in Cannon, given presumably the inordinate number of complaints about core, traditional discrimination. But as the other side has made clear in its briefing in this case, at page 26 of the petitioner's brief -- and then there's a brief filed on behalf of the Southern Poverty Law Center that spins this out in some detail -- there just aren't many of these retaliation claims out there, either in the -- either -- either in the judicial system or at OCR.
 Why is that, do you think?
 Well, my -- I'm sorry.
 Is it because no remedy is available, or is it because there are just very few instances giving rise to such?
 Well, I think in all likelihood, it is the latter. Certainly I would think that the Court would presume -- would not presume ill of local school districts and -- and even State universities, but would presume that they are complying with, if not clearly articulated law, certainly good public policy. The second point is that what the -- the absence of private actions for retaliation shows is that title IX's remedial apparatus is kicking along just fine without the implied right of action.
 Do we decide this case on the assumption that there was retaliation here by virtue of a complaint of violation of title IX?
 Certainly, Your Honor --
 We should decide it on that assumption?
 You have to take as true, of course, the facts as pledged in the -- as pleaded in the complaint. Another point I'd like to make briefly is about the comparison to title VII. The other side wants you to look very closely at title VII when you're -- whether it's on the basis of sex or on the basis of such individual's sex, but they want you to ignore title VII and the fact that it very clearly and expressly deals with retaliation in a separate subsection, a separate provision. And I didn't -- I'll have to confess I didn't hear much during the first argument. I had my head in my own book, but what I did hear is Justice Souter referring to the -- the -- an instance in which Congress has a choice of two models for -- for constructing a statute, and it chooses one over the other, and isn't it a reasonable inference to allow Congress to make that choice. That's what happened here.
 Like the choice it made in 1982, very spare statute. When Congress got to title IX, it knew about Sullivan and so it -- this -- this statute in its breadth and its simplicity bears a striking resemblance to the old pattern in 1981 and 1982 and 1983. So if you say to me, look at the closest model, it would be that and not the more detailed civil rights legislation that came in '64 and '65.
 Well, if -- if I could answer in two parts. First, to say that I think what was going on in 1964 in the Civil Rights Act, obviously, you have Congress in title VII addressing itself both to discrimination and to retaliation separately; in title VI, passed as part of the same piece of legislation, addressing itself solely to discrimination. And to use Justice Souter's analogy, in '72 Congress takes the title VI model and not the title VII model. Now, to get to your question specifically, I think, about Sullivan is at the heart of your question, Sullivan -- I think there are a number of problems with the other side's reliance on Sullivan. First, with all due respect to this Court, Sullivan itself is pretty opaque. It certainly does not announce with flashing lights a principle that every anti-discrimination provision necessarily entails a subsidiary or corollary --
 It says if you're thrown out of the club because you champion the rights of a black man, you have a right to sue under this statute.
 Even if I were to grant your assumption of clarity in Sullivan, which Justice Harlan, I presume, would not agree with -- he was left sort of scratching his head trying to figure out what the Court was trying to do. But even granting your assumption, if 1982 can be construed that way, that -- that construction does not necessarily carry over to every anti-discrimination provision. 1982, of course, uses different language to begin with and, more importantly, is -- is passed under Congress's power under the Thirteenth Amendment, which is the broadest conceivable --
 Yes, but it did construe the word discrimination, didn't it?
 No, sir. Discrimination is not even in -- is not even in title -- rather, in 1982. So the language is very different --
 On account of race is in it. Right?
 I'll have to confess I don't -- it does say something like every person shall have the same right as -- dot, dot, dot, as white persons. But so the -- the language frankly is pretty different, and the more fundamental point I'm trying to make is that even if that's true for -- for that statute passed under that constitutional power, here we are talking, as Justice Kennedy made clear at the very outset of the argument about a Spending Clause statute, where it is required that conditions on the acceptance of Federal funds be express, and it is not clear to me where the Birmingham Board would have gotten its clear notice in this case. If you can imagine --
 It seems to me they would get it when Congress says, and here's the statute, very spare, and agency, you get up guidelines, that any responsible school board would say, well, we've got only one sentence in the statute. We better look at the regulations to find out what's required.
 I agree, and -- and if -- and if the Birmingham Board, which I trust it did, looked to the regulation here, what it would have found is a regulation not that clarifies the substantive scope of title IX, but instead that -- that manages the internal operating procedures for official agency investigations. So to be sure, the Birmingham Board was on notice that it could not retaliate in -- in the business of an official OCR investigation, and if it did, it would be subject to administrative enforcement, but it was -- it was not on notice either of the fact that there was a generic anti-retaliation prohibition, much less the fact that if it violated any such nonexistent --
 But it's -- we're not talking about the procedure, I mean, what procedural moves. What must you do to comply? And it has in there you don't retaliate. So you mean that a board could responsibly take the position, well, the -- the regulations tell us we don't retaliate, but when we're not faced with any agency breathing down our neck, all we have is a teacher in front of us, then we can retaliate? I mean, they must have known the statute meant don't retaliate.
 And -- and with respect, I think there is a difference, particularly given the clear notice requirements that this Court has -- has used in Spending Clause cases between retaliation in the context of an OCR investigation and retaliation generally, but -- I'm sorry.
 I -- I really don't get that. If the rule is don't retaliate and if we investigate, that's one of the things we're going -- that's going to be on our checklist. But the substantive rule is don't retaliate.
 Justice Stevens, may I respond?
 Yes.
 Even granting your assumption, Justice Ginsburg, what is painfully not clear is that the -- is that the Birmingham Board would be subject to -- to a private right of action for damages and fees even in -- in the event that there were some generally applicable anti-retaliation provision.
 Thank you, Mr. Newsom.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens.
 Mr. Dellinger, you have about 3 and a half minutes.
 I should make it clear that we're not asking this Court to create or infer a new cause of action. We're asking the Court to interpret the cause of action that the Court itself recognized in Cannon v. the University of Chicago, that was validated by Congress. It was reaffirmed in the Court's opinion in Sandoval. And when you look at the scope of that -- of that prohibition, that cause of action, why would it not extend to retaliation? The idea that you --
 Other statutes do it separately.
 I understand.
 Other statutes don't view the one as -- as being incorporated in the other.
 The practice of Congress has not been consistent on incorporating express provisions sometimes because of language differences, but there are half a dozen major statutes that the courts of appeal have consistently assumed included retaliation as part of discrimination. Section 1981, section 1982, title VI, 1982 as determined by this Court, parts of the Rehabilitation Act have all been construed that way. And why would they not? The notion that you have to admit Geraldine Cannon to the University of Chicago Medical School, you can't discriminate against her on the basis of sex, but then you could turn around and expel her for complaining about your admissions policy makes no sense. In this case, relying upon the vagaries of what any administration might do about enforcement is not necessarily what Congress wanted, and that was this Court's decision in Cannon. And it's reaffirmed it frankly --
 There are no vagaries in private enforcement. Private attorneys general always act in the interest of the whole polity. There are no vagaries there.
 Well, in this case, it has been known to effectuate anti-discrimination laws in order to bring them about by allowing people to step forward. The last point they make is that even if there's a cause of action, and even if the cause of action covers retaliation, it cannot be brought by Coach Jackson because he's not also the victim of the underlying discrimination. That makes no sense in law or in logic. If the captain of the boys' basketball team joins with the captain of the girls' basketball team in a supportive way to say, they're just not treating girls' basketball equally and fairly, and they're both suspended from their teams or dropped from the honor society in retaliation, it makes no sense. Either they both have -- they've both been discriminated against on the basis of sex because they're trying to rectify sex discrimination or neither is. And in this case, it's going to be critically important that this valuable statute, which has meant so much for athletic and academic opportunities for women, to have people like Coach Jackson able to be confident that they've got a right that they can enforce that will allow them to come forward within the school itself and try to rectify these anomalies in and under title IX. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Dellinger. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument now in Antonio Dwayne Halbert v. Michigan. Mr. Moran.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: The issue in this case is whether, 42 years after this Court decided in Douglas v. California that indigent defendants have the right to the assistance of counsel for a first-tier direct felony appeal --
 Well, now, Douglas didn't involve a guilty plea, I guess.
 It did not, Your Honor. It was a trial case.
 And did the Court say anything about the effect of having it be a guilty plea? I guess it didn't.
 It did not. None of this Court's cases in the Douglas line have turned on whether the conviction was by trial or by plea.
 Does that make a difference or could it?
 I don't believe it does, Your Honor, because as Mr. Halbert's case demonstrates, all sorts of difficult, technical issues can arise in a guilty plea. Of course, certain issues are waived. Trial issues are waived by the effect of a guilty plea, but many other issues remain. And as Mr. Halbert's case demonstrates, especially in the guilty plea cases -- this Court well knows the effect of the Federal sentencing guidelines -- very complicated issues of sentencing law arise. And now Michigan has a sentencing guideline system that is perhaps more complicated than the Federal system that's been in effect since the 1980's.
 Did -- did your client waive any right to appeal here in connection with the proceedings of the plea?
 He did not waive a right to file an application for leave to appeal. Because of the --
 What did he waive?
 He waived the right to have a -- to have what is called in Michigan an automatic appeal, in other words, the right to automatically have full briefing and oral argument. So what he agreed to by pleading was to go through the application for leave to appeal procedure which involves a preliminary determination of merit as to whether the appeal should proceed.
 Why didn't he waive the right to have counsel for that -- for that purpose since that was the law in Michigan?
 Well, he did not -- first of all, as a matter of fact, he did not. He was never told at any point during the plea proceedings that he would be giving up his right to counsel.
 Well, he was told what -- what right to counsel he would have and it didn't include this.
 He was told that under certain circumstances the judge would appoint counsel.
 Right.
 But the judge never said, under any other circumstances, I will not appoint counsel.
 Well, isn't that a perfectly natural inference if you're told you get A and B, that C and D might have been -- that C and D will not be given?
 It might be a natural inference for somebody with a level of sophistication, but Mr. Halbert is a special education student, functionally illiterate. And nobody explained to him that he wouldn't be given his right to counsel.
 Well, did we take this case on the ground that he wasn't adequately advised or did we take the case on the ground that even if he were advised, he'd still have his right?
 I hope the latter, Justice Kennedy, because this is a case in which the State is making a waiver argument. And, of course, the waiver argument is not part of -- is not the intent of the statute. What the statute does is it tacks on and, by the way, the defendant should be advised at the time of the plea that they won't be getting counsel.
 Well, I -- I take it you would challenge the validity of the waiver even if he were advised?
 Absolutely.
 And even if he said, I hereby waive?
 Absolutely, we would because that is a waiver that is designed to extract only from the poor. That waiver has no effect whatsoever on those with money because, in fact, a money defendant is not even eligible for appointed counsel on appeal. So that waiver has no effect whatsoever on --
 Well, wouldn't -- I'm -- I'm sorry.
 It would have no effect whatsoever on money defendants I'm saying.
 Wouldn't your position be different if he had been advised that he had exactly the right that you claim he has, and the court said, however, in Michigan you may not enter the -- the plea unless you waive that right? If -- if you don't want to waive that right, which I've just explained to you, we'll -- we'll have a trial. Would -- would your answer still be that -- that waiver would be as a matter of law impossible?
 The waiver would be unconstitutional under those conditions because it is a discriminatory waiver. To show how breathtaking the State's argument --
 How -- why is that prejudicial to him? He says, okay, I can't plead guilty. I really did it but I can't plead guilty. Go ahead.
 I'm sorry.
 Why doesn't he just have a trial? He says, I'm not going to contest the trial.
 Well, as this Court has long recognized, a trial provides very substantial benefit. I mean, excuse me. A guilty plea provides very substantial benefits. And so the effect of the Michigan statute then would be only the money defendant can receive the benefits of a guilty plea and then have sentencing errors corrected.
 Now, is that what you were going to say to Justice Souter, before I interrupted, that it's -- that it's far-reaching.
 Yes. Well, not only that, if the State's waiver argument is correct, then presumably the State could extract a waiver saying you can't have free transcripts. You can't have the waiver of the filing fees. In fact, the State could extract a waiver saying you can't have counsel at sentencing.
 These are all disparate impact arguments. There's -- there's -- you're not making any argument that the State intentionally discriminates against the poor. You're just saying the effect of this is harder on the poor than it is on the rich. But I thought our -- our equal protection cases have -- have said that disparate impact doesn't -- doesn't hack it as far as equal protection is concerned.
 Well, Justice Scalia, I actually have two responses to that. First, this is intentionally aimed at the poor. Looking at 770.3a, the statute under -- in question here, it is clearly aimed at the indigent. It refers to the indigent. So this is a statute that on its face is -- is taking away the right of the indigent and only the indigent to have -- have an attorney. So I don't agree that is is a -- simply a disparate impact case. But in the context of appellate counsel for a first-tier felony appeal, this Court's cases have -- have not applied the same line of analysis that this Court has applied in other contexts, and I think that's quite clear most recently in the MLB case --
 In any event, you pointed out that on the face there is the distinction on the face of it --
 Yes.
 -- it is not a disparate impact case at all --
 Yes.
 -- because it affects only indigents.
 Yes. There is no question that this statute was enacted for and specifically applies only to the indigent. It has -- it has no impact whatsoever on the wealthy, and it's aimed at the -- at the indigent only. So I do -- I do not agree that this --
 Whenever a State has -- has initially given a broad benefit to the poor, whenever it cuts back on poor -- on part of that benefit, it is denying equal protection to the poor? That -- that seems to be an extraordinary proposition. The State isn't picking on the poor. It's just saying that -- that the -- the free counsel we have agreed to provide in the past we're no longer going to provide in this -- in this one instance of guilty pleas. And -- and you say that -- that is intentional discrimination against the poor?
 It's not a -- a disparate impact claim I say, because it is intentionally aimed at the poor. The statute was designed to take away counsel from the poor and only from the poor.
 So any cutback on benefits that is given -- on benefits that are given to the poor is intentional discrimination against the poor.
 I'm not saying any, Justice Scalia.
 Just this one because that's your case.
 This case certainly is.
 You're saying this is case like Douglas which was equal protection, like a free transcript, like a filing fee for an appeal.
 Yes.
 You're bracketing --
 This case -- in many ways the restrictions that are placed on the indigent's ability to appeal in Michigan, as a result of this statute, are worse than those that were struck down in Douglas because at least in Douglas the court, the appellate court, would review the entire transcript, looking for arguable issues. We don't even have that here. All we have here is the indigent forced to shift for himself, forced to try and determine whether there are any issues, forced to order his own transcript. Under the Michigan statute, the indigent has to figure out how to obtain his or her docket entries, his or her transcripts, his or her prisoner account statements, all the documents necessary for filing a first appeal that would ordinarily be done by counsel. And so --
 May I just understand one point that Justice Scalia's question raises for me? In your view, is the provision of counsel for the indigent for appellate purposes purely a matter of grace, or was there some underlying obligation to provide counsel?
 Oh, it's my -- it's certainly my contention, Justice Stevens, that Michigan is required to afford appellate counsel in this situation for a first-tier direct felony appeal on the merits.
 So that ultimately your case rests not on equal protection but due process.
 It's a merger of both principles, as this Court said --
 But it's one as much as the other, isn't it?
 Yes.
 I mean, you're -- we're saying if you're going to provide a first appeal of right, one incident of that is, as a matter of due process, you've got to provide counsel.
 Yes, Justice Souter.
 So you're -- you're retracting the pure equal protection claim? I don't think you want to do that. I mean, you would say that even if there were not a due process right, you would still regard this as -- as directed against the poor.
 It is directed --
 Or not?
 It is directed against the poor, which is why there is an equal protection component to this argument, but this Court's cases --
 But you say that component wouldn't exist unless you begin with a due process right to have counsel on appeal.
 I believe that's right. It's -- it's difficult -- I have to confess, Your Honor, it's difficult sometimes to separate out the due process and equal protection strands from the Griffin and Douglas line, and this Court most recently in MLB said that there is a certain merger. Also, I believe in Smith v. Robbins this Court reiterated that there is a certain merger of the lines in these cases. But --
 You're -- you're saying that the due process is what gets you beyond the stage of merely providing counsel as a matter of grace. That's what due process does for you. Because they have to provide counsel not merely as a matter of grace, you have a very clear equal protection case which you would not otherwise have. Isn't -- isn't that the way the two work together?
 I think that's right, Justice Souter. I think I agree with that.
 Can -- in your view, can the State require a waiver of the right to appeal for everyone?
 That's a question this Court hasn't decided, and I don't have a position on that. But that's far different from this case because that would not be discriminatory.
 Well, I'm not so sure. It certainly goes to the importance or the significance of the underlying right. My understanding is -- correct me if I'm wrong -- that in the Federal system, we require waivers of the right to appeal frequently, even waiver of the right to appeal the sentence even before the sentence is calculated, as I understand it.
 Yes.
 And do you question the lawfulness of that?
 I don't. And that -- that case has not come before this Court yet, and so I don't know how this Court would decide that case if it comes. I know some of the Federal circuits have upheld such appellate waivers as a part of a negotiated guilty plea. One thing the Michigan statute is -- does is it takes away the right to appeal effectively for indigents without negotiation. It's -- it's the baseline.
 But, Mr. Moran, if -- if you're -- if you're tying your equal protection claim to a due process claim and if it is not a violation of due process to require people to waive their -- I mean, you can waive entirely the right to appeal. Surely you can waive the right to counsel on appeal. If that's not a violation of due process, then your equal protection claim dissolves.
 But, Your Honor, the problem is -- is that the statute requires only the poor, imposes a forced waiver on only the poor.
 That's an equal protection claim.
 That's an equal protection claim.
 But you've -- you've said your equal protection claim hinges on the due process claim. If the due process claim, in turn, hinges upon waiver, then apart from the -- from the dispute in this case as to whether waiver occurred or not, if waiver does occur, there's no due process claim, and then there's no equal protection claim.
 I'm really not sure that you can separate out the two strands of the Fourteenth Amendment again, and I know this Court didn't try in MLB, and I know this Court didn't try in Smith v. Robbins, so that there is -- there is a component of both. And it's precisely because of these sorts of questions that I think you have to view them as an integrated whole for purposes of the Griffin/Douglas line.
 In any case --
 Where -- where do we find the waiver here? Is it in the joint appendix?
 Well, it's my position there was no waiver, but the --
 But you referred to something that was waived.
 Yes.
 Where would we find that?
 Well, the plea proceeding. It's the plea proceeding. And it's --
 Well, don't take your time to look it up. Maybe counsel for respondent can find it for us.
 It's -- it's in the joint appendix --
 All right.
 -- beginning on page 19.
 It's their argument anyway. Let them --
 I'm missing something on waiver, but I would have thought a person can waive a -- a right to have a counsel on appeal. He can waive a trial. He can waive a jury trial. But before he has to -- before he decides, he has to know that he has the constitutional right to a jury trial.
 That's right.
 And why wouldn't he also have to have the -- to know that he has the constitutional right to a lawyer to represent him?
 Well, that's my position Justice
 All right. That has nothing to do with equal protection. It has to do simply with a very common sense rule that we apply in every case, jury trial, et cetera. So all we'd have to say is, of course, he has a right to a lawyer. Now, if he wants to go back and waive that right, fine.
 That's right.
 That's all. That's the end of it.
 That's right.
 So what's all this complicated thing about?
 If an indigent, after being sentenced, decided for whatever reason I would prefer to go on appeal by myself, which is actually a -- a right this Court rejected in Martinez, that you have a right to represent yourself on appeal, but in Michigan an indigent is allowed to -- would be allowed to represent himself or herself on appeal if they chose to do so. The problem here is that the statute purports to take away the right, and it's our position that this is a --
 No, no. You'd have to say the statute is wrong in taking away the right.
 Yes.
 But he can waive it if he wants to, knowing that he has the right.
 That's right. We have no problem with a voluntary waiver. We certainly have a problem with a forced waiver saying that you cannot enter a plea which produces tremendous benefits in Michigan, as everywhere else, unless -- unless you agree to waiver --
 Oh, but -- but that happens all the time. I mean, the waiver -- waiver of appeal in -- in guilty -- in guilty pleas. That's -- that's not permissible either?
 I take no position on that. It may or may not permissible.
 Well, you have to if you're going to make the argument you just made.
 But it's far different because that's something that can be obtained in negotiation. But what we would have --
 Well, Mr. Moran, here on page 22 of the joint appendix, the court is speaking to the defendant and says, you understand if I accept your plea, you are giving up or waiving any claim of an appeal as of right.
 Yes.
 And you think that was not effective?
 No. That was effective. That -- that's referring to the automatic appeal that he would have if he went to trial where he would have full briefing and oral argument. The Michigan --
 Well, I -- it doesn't say that.
 No, it doesn't. This was a -- this was a pretty poor waiver proceeding in a number of -- of respects, but it --
 Well, he does --
 I'm --
 -- he does go on to say that -- that he can appoint a lawyer for -- in certain instances. He doesn't complete the explanation by saying there are other instances and when I will not appoint one. That he leaves out, although this a represented defendant.
 Yes, he was.
 He had a counsel at the plea hearing.
 He did.
 I'm mixed up again. What is the answer to this? I -- I would have thought that even if those words that Justice O'Connor read referred directly to the kind of appeal that we have in front of us -- in other words, the one that's at issue -- that still he'd have to know he has a right to a lawyer on that appeal before he could waive it.
 Yes, Justice Breyer, I agree.
 And does anybody dispute that?
 I believe --
 Is that at issue here?
 I -- I believe the State might dispute that. I'm not sure. What the Michigan constitution does, Justice O'Connor, if I may come back to your question, is it says that for somebody who pleads guilty or nolo contendere, they are giving up the right to the automatic appeal, and they have -- they then have to proceed by the application for leave to appeal. And so the Michigan constitution explicitly still provides a right to appeal, but it changes the method. And so Michigan's appeal, after a guilty plea now, is like the first appeal in several other States, Virginia, West Virginia, and -- and several other States have guilty plea appeals.
 That's a strange terminology. It doesn't provide a right to appeal. It -- it provides a right to apply for an appeal, a right to ask for an appeal. A right to ask for an appeal is not a right to get an appeal.
 It's framed in terms of a -- of a right. Page 2 of the brief --
 So you have an absolute right to ask for an appeal.
 Yes.
 But that's not a right to appeal. It's a right to request an appeal, which can be granted or denied.
 Yes.
 Okay.
 But it's a -- it's -- what Michigan has done is it has changed the method of the appeal. And so Virginia, for example, has first-tier appeals by petition. West Virginia has a first-tier by petition and --
 Well, it's done more than change the method. It's changed the entitlement. The court can simply say we're not interested in your appeal. It doesn't raise a significant legal issue.
 Yes, Justice Scalia, but that's not how the -- the Michigan Court of Appeals works. The Michigan Court of Appeals is an error-correcting court. And so in Mr. Halbert's case, the Michigan Court of Appeals denied his appeal, after his futile attempt to -- to identify his issues, with an order saying that there was a lack of merit in the grounds presented. That is a preclusive decision on the merits of his case. That --
 That's just -- but that's just boiler plate, isn't it? That's what they say in all these cases.
 Yes.
 And I think Michigan cites a Michigan Supreme Court decision that says it's not on the merits.
 That --
 It's People v. Berry?
 Yes. That was a decision of the Michigan Supreme Court referring to its own orders denying applications for leave to appeal which are not on the merits. The Michigan Supreme Court denies the applications for saying -- by saying, we are not persuaded that we should hear the questions presented.
 Well, why wouldn't it be the same if the -- if it's a discretionary appeal at the intermediate appellate level?
 Because the Michigan Court of Appeals, unlike the Michigan Supreme Court, is an error-correcting court. And so it issues orders saying denied for lack of merit. And the Michigan Court of Appeals dozens and dozens of times in the last 25 years has said, without exception, that is a decision on the merits that precludes relitigation under the law of the case doctrine.
 Didn't -- didn't the supreme court in the Bulger case -- was that the name of it?
 Yes.
 Didn't it say that the -- that the intermediate court's denial of -- of appeals was a discretionary judgment?
 It called it a discretionary appeal, Justice Scalia, without ever explaining why, and the -- the dissent in Bulger pointed out the Michigan Court of Appeals is an error-correcting court. And in fact, the very author of the --
 That was a dissent, though.
 That's right, but the very author of the opinion in Bulger, Chief Justice Corrigan, just 1 year later or 2 years later describes the effect of -- of an order denying leave to appeal in the Michigan Court of Appeals, and says it clearly shows they considered and rejected the merits.
 So, in effect, it's discretionary in the sense that it's discretionary as to whether to give it full-dress treatment, but the bottom line, whether they give it full dress or -- or merely discretionary denial is -- is an implication on the merits.
 Yes, exactly as in Virginia. In Jackson v. Virginia, the Court recognized that the -- the Virginia situation is exactly the same, that there is a petition to appeal to the Virginia Court of Appeals, and that each petition is considered on the merits, and a denial of the petition is seen as a decision on the merits that precludes relitigation under the law of the case doctrine. And so Michigan's appeal after a guilt plea now is exactly like the one in Virginia.
 Is that something the intermediate appellate court has said? Have they said that, that -- we have a -- a discretionary appeal, but every -- in every case it's a merits decision? We don't have any decisions that say we are exercising our discretion not to review.
 If a -- if a appeal or an application to the Michigan Court of Appeals is filed in the wrong form or is untimely or has some other defect, then the court will occasionally issue an order denying the application for that reason. But for any properly filed application for leave to appeal, the longstanding practice of the Michigan Court of Appeals is to say it is denied for lack of merit in the grounds presented.
 This means, I would presume, that -- that we would -- we would have to give -- our Federal courts on habeas would have to give deference to all decisions of the intermediate court since they're all on the merits.
 And they do.
 Federal courts do?
 Yes.
 They assume that all factual and legal arguments have been decided against the -- the person applying for a discretionary appeal?
 Yes. After Abela v. Martin in the Sixth Circuit. And there is a -- a whole host of Federal district court decisions in the Eastern and Western District of Michigan all saying that when an order is denied for lack of merit in the grounds presented, the AEDPA standard of review applies. And so the State obtains tremendous benefits from this procedure. They obtain deference on habeas corpus review. They prevent the indigent, if the indigent were to ever get a lawyer at some later stage, from beginning relitigation on State collateral review. And so the State very happily argues for all of those purposes that this is a decision on the merits, but then they come before this Court and they say, oh, no, it's not a decision on the merits. It's really discretionary despite what it says because they are hoping that this Court will conclude that it is a discretionary appeal. In fact, the State --
 Mr. Moran.
 -- has made an even more radical argument in its brief. The State maintains that the appeal to the Michigan Court of Appeals is a second-tier appeal, and that is plainly contrary to the -- to the actual function of that court because there is a provision that if trial counsel suddenly realizes in a plea case, after sentencing, that there are issues that she should have raised, it allows her to do that. And so the State now argues that that's really the first-tier appeal, and then the application that follows after that to the Michigan Court of Appeals is a second-tier appeal. I'll just point out that even the State's amicus doesn't agree with that, and -- and rightfully so in light of Swenson v. Bosler, which has rejected an attempt to reorganize by labeling how one's appeals go.
 Mr. Moran, before your -- your time is up, I did want to know what is your position on -- let's say that there is -- you prevail and there is a right to counsel for these applications to appeal. And if counsel looks at the case and determines that there is no tenable ground for an appeal, could counsel file the equivalent of an Anders brief?
 Yes. Yes, Justice Ginsburg, and in fact, I have done that personally. Before I became an academic, I worked at the State Appellate Defender Office in Detroit and was appointed to represent indigents on plea appeals. And in a significant percentage of the cases -- I can't quote you the numbers off the top of my head -- after reviewing the case, the appellate counsel then concludes that there is no merit, that there are no grounds to proceed, that the defendant in fact got whatever it was she bargained for in the plea bargaining, at which point then either a motion to withdraw may be filed or -- or the equivalent, the Michigan equivalent, of an Anders brief. And so that is done in a number of cases. It is our position that that procedure actually helps improve the appellate process in Michigan because without that process, all you have are indigents like Mr. Halbert, a special education student with mental disabilities, trying to identify his own issues and fall -- and filing, in -- in his case, with the help of a fellow prisoner because he could not have done it himself -- the help of a fellow prisoner, an application that is completely incoherent, misses several issues that are right on the face of the record, correctly asserts that his sentencing guidelines were misscored but -- but without explaining why, without even identifying which sentencing guidelines were misscored. And in fact, he received a minimum sentence that was approximately three times too high under the sentencing guidelines. The State concedes that one of the sentencing guidelines was scored in the State's favor erroneously. We concede one of the -- one of the sentencing guidelines was scored in Mr. Halbert's favor erroneously. But then there were two others, and the most important ones, the OV, Offense Variable, 13. That was scored for 25 points in both cases. And so Mr. -- Mr. Halbert, in fact, received a sentence that was much too high. Michigan requires -- Michigan is one of the few States that requires that ineffective assistance of counsel claims be raised on direct appeal or they're lost. And so at that point, Mr. Halbert had to figure out a way to raise an ineffective assistance of counsel hearing, which requires an evidentiary hearing at which trial counsel must be called, assuming trial counsel is still available to be called, all from prison, and there was no possible way he could do that. So it's not very surprising that even with the help of a fellow inmate, that his application for leave to appeal was completely incoherent. The fellow inmate actually did write the -- the trial judge and say we need to have an evidentiary hearing on ineffective assistance of counsel. But under the statute, the judge had no discretion to grant that motion. Under the statute, only if there was already an upward departure from the sentencing guidelines, only then would the judge be required to appoint counsel, and of course, the guidelines, as misscored without objection from defense counsel -- there was no upward departure at that point. If the Court has no further questions, I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
 Very well, Mr. Moran. Mr. Restuccia.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: I want to start with the factual claim regarding the waiver that the Court identified, pages 22 and 23 from the joint appendix, being the point at which Mr. Halbert, in fact, waived his right to the appointment of appellate counsel. I think Justice Scalia is right in noting that he was told specifically it's under these conditions you'll be appointed a counsel; under these conditions, you might be appointed counsel. From context it's unambiguous that he would otherwise not receive counsel. And what's important is at the joint appendix on page 45, the trial court, in fact, made a factual finding on this point. So in order for this Court to conclude that Mr. Halbert did not waive his right to appellate counsel under the particular circumstances, you would have -- you would have to conclude that the trial court was clearly erroneous in its factual finding.
 Well, I mean, wouldn't we have to conclude that if we're going to apply the same standards here that we usually do in -- in the plea waiver situation? I mean, we -- the -- the classic point of it all is the knowing -- the -- the intelligent, voluntary waiver of a known right. And leaving aside the equal protection problem here, even if we didn't have that, I don't see that there would be -- have been an adequate waiver here because he was never told that he had the right that he now claims as a matter of due process. You indeed, dispute it.
 Yes.
 But unless he were told that, the -- the waiver that -- that depends upon parsing the difference between must and may in the two paragraphs of explanation certainly wouldn't be taken as the predicate for a waiver of a known right.
 I -- I think that the colloquy makes clear that he does not -- he's not going to have an appeal as of right, and then when told that --
 Well, the -- the appeal of his right -- the appeal as of right point, as I understand it, is a different point. What they're getting at there is it will be discretionary with the reviewing court whether your case is reviewed on the merits on some point if you ask for it. We're here dealing with the right to counsel, and it seems to me unless he were told that he had the right to counsel that he claims and he then waived it, that there wouldn't be a -- an -- an adequate waiver under Boykin.
 I think in -- in context when told that only under these circumstances you're going to receive counsel in bringing discretionary application, that it's clear that he is waiving in his decision to go forward with the -- his plea --
 Look, the -- imagine -- I'm just repeating what Justice Souter said. There must be -- it's so obvious that there must be an obvious answer, but I haven't heard the answer. He knows Michigan law or his lawyer does. The Michigan lawyer looks at the statute. It says a defendant who pleads guilty shall not have appellate counsel appointed for review with some exceptions, which they claim are inadequate. So he thinks the law is shall not. I have no right. So he doesn't not only -- not only is he not waiving a known right, there's nothing for him to waive. He has no such right. Now, obviously, when there's nothing for him to waive, how could he waive anything? And obviously, a person who's told, hey, you don't have a right to appeal no matter what and then he says, okay, I waive my right to appeal, I mean, really.
 I think that the -- the -- for the two questions that are asked, he explains -- the court explained to him he didn't have appeal as of right but then said --
 Okay, that's the end of it. Right?
 But then -- and then the -- the --
 But he had an appeal of right until he pleaded guilty.
 That's right.
 And that's where -- that's what the waiver consists of. To say he didn't have an appeal of right, no. That's -- he had an appeal of right up until the point where he pleads guilty, and that's what -- and that's what the judge is asking.
 Precisely.
 Do you want to -- do you want to plead guilty, even though if you plead guilty, you'll get -- you'll get a lawyer only under these circumstances.
 Precisely.
 The court didn't say only --
 And that's what we're deciding is --
 That's the problem.
 That's exactly the issue in front of us. Is it constitutional or not constitutional? And waiver has nothing to do with it.
 I think that -- I also want to make the point, of course, that there was a factual finding, so if this Court did conclude, it would have to find the trial court was clearly erroneous. The --
 Mr. Restuccia, the -- we are dealing here, as is not uncommon, with someone who is learning disabled, mentally impaired, and the trial court did not say if you plead, you relinquish your right to counsel in seeking leave to appeal. It said only when -- if this exists, I must, and if that exists, I must, but did not say if you plead, you relinquish your right to counsel in seeking leave to appeal. And I was curious as a matter of what is going on in Michigan trial courts now. Do judges routinely tell defendants who plead guilty -- tell them not only when the court must give them counsel, but if you plead, you relinquish your right to counsel in seeking leave to appeal? Because that --
 Yes.
 -- that was never imparted in this case.
 The advice concerning right to appeal, the one that was used in the trial court here, was a form from 2000. The -- the 2004 form is available from the Michigan Supreme Court web site, and it has been modified now that -- because the trial court -- it seems apparent that he was reading from the advice concerning right of -- to appeal. The way it reads now is it will say you are not entitled to have a lawyer appointed at public expense to assist you in filing an application for leave to appeal. So this -- this -- the colloquy now would happen differently, but I think that --
 Of course, your case is a little stronger than -- than the court just asked -- just saying I must appoint counsel in this circumstance and I must appoint counsel in another circumstance. That might have left open the implication that you could appoint counsel in other circumstances, but the court went on and to say I might appoint counsel in this circumstance and I might appoint counsel in the other circumstance. So if there's any implication from it, the implication is not just that I have -- I have listed all the areas in which I must, but it's also I have listed all the areas in which I either must or even may, if there's an implication.
 I think -- I think that's right.
 Well, apparently the people who -- who redid the model instructions thought that this would be a clearer one, to tell him up front you don't get counsel if you don't fit under these exceptions.
 That's right. And they -- they did -- they did modify the form. So on the question of the underlying constitutionality, I want to -- I want to make a few points, that the -- the threshold question really is whether there's an appeal as of right in Michigan for a plea-based conviction. Michigan law is clear that there is no appeal by right. It's an application process and it's a discretionary review. The Michigan Court of Appeals has no obligation to correct errors in these cases, has no obligation to review the merits.
 Do you agree with your opponent that for AEDPA purposes, they treat the intermediate decision as a decision on the merits?
 No. The law in the Sixth Circuit is in fact in conflict with a case -- an earlier case, McKenzie v. Smith -- had determined that the -- a decision with that language, that virtually identical language, is not -- is not entitled to deference.
 So your opponent has misrepresented Michigan law.
 No. I didn't say -- I wasn't suggesting that. Abela is one case stating one position. McKenzie, an earlier case, stated another position.
 But he says there are dozens of cases at the district court level that apply AEDPA in the way he described. Is that wrong?
 Well, he didn't cite those cases. I --
 No, he didn't, but do you think he's wrong?
 I -- I know that our office handles all the habeas -- habeas corpus --
 Do you think he's wrong?
 I think he is wrong. The --
 Are you going on -- on record as saying that Michigan does not and will not, in the United States courts, claim any AEDPA deference as a result of one of these determinations?
 The Solicitor General made that position clear before the argument -- before this Court in Tesmer v. Kowalski. So we have not been advancing that claim. In fact, we've been advancing a claim --
 And you have not been -- and -- and Michigan lawyers have not been advancing that claim in the district courts?
 The -- all the habeas petitions are run through the office of the Attorney General, so that the -- when the Solicitor General from the State of Michigan instructed our staff not to advance that claim, that means all habeas cases in Michigan essentially there will be -- that argument will not be advanced.
 So, so far as you can tell, that's the way it's been.
 That's right. That's right. And because there is no appeal as of right under Michigan law, this -- the Douglas case doesn't govern the disposition. Ultimately the -- the controlling is Ross. And the issue then is whether Michigan provides a meaningful access to an indigent defendant who wants to bring an application for leave. That's really the -- I think the heart of the constitutional issue. There are three distinct characteristics of the Michigan system. The -- the nature of the review is discretionary, and I think comparable to the kind of review in Ross that was described by this Court for the North Carolina Supreme Court. Mr. Moran makes a claim that the Michigan Court of Appeals is an error-correcting court. With regard to applications for leave where there is no right to have the merits reviewed, it is not an error-correcting court. In fact, one of the reasons for the legislation in Michigan, the reason the Michigan constitution was changed was because of the heavy volume that the Michigan Court of Appeals was facing. There are 28 judges in the Michigan Court of Appeals, and they produce --
 Do they all sit together?
 No. They're panels of three. They issue about 4,000 opinions each year. So each judge is responsible for authoring --
 But it's just one court.
 One court. That's right. So each judge is responsible for authoring between 130-140 opinions, having to join in another 280. So resource allocation is one of the pressing concerns in the Michigan Court of Appeals. The situations in which the court of appeals will grant leave on application are rare. It's -- it's reluctant to grant leave in these cases in part because of the --
 Then why -- if it's just denying -- or not granting appeal, why does it use the boiler plate, for lack of merit in the grounds presented?
 It's used that standard order for the last 20 years or longer. The only Michigan Court of Appeals case in -- only published case in an application for leave setting is the Bobenal case cited by the people in our -- the State of Michigan in its brief, in which the Michigan Court of Appeals said there is no -- this is not a determination on the merits. The only published case for Michigan in which there was an application for leave from a plea-based conviction is People v. Berry in which the Michigan Court of Appeals, after initially having denied leave, then in a collateral attack granted leave on the very same issue and said that its original --
 Why -- sorry. Finish. I just had a -- I wanted to go back to something you said, but I want you to be finished.
 Could I ask about grounds presented before we get off this? Is it conceivable that the lack of merit in the grounds presented means lack of merit in the -- in the grounds of application? Is -- is the applicant required to state why this particular appeal is worthy of being entertained?
 They're supposed to raise those arguments. I think that's exactly right, that merits can have different meanings, and it can -- it can relate to whether it would justify the resources of the court to examine the underlying merits of the claim. I think that's right. That's one understanding of the -- of the order that's consistent with the way it's been treated by the court of appeals and also, most importantly, by the Michigan constitution, when the people of the State of Michigan said trial-based convictions, there's an appeal as of right. For all other convictions, for plea-based convictions, it would be by leave. The Michigan's Supreme Court, in examining this very question about the nature of review, said that it was discretionary.
 What of Mr. -- Mr. Moran's point that this -- whatever the merits are, it counts as law of the case and it's -- it conclusively determines the issues presented?
 That's not what happened in -- in People -- in the Bobenal case, which was a court of appeals published decision where the order read virtually identical -- identically to this one, and the court of appeals said it could -- would not be bound by its original denial of leave for the lack of merits on the grounds presented and reached the merits of the claim. The same thing happened in -- in the Berry case in which --
 Well, that was the same court, though, wasn't it?
 Right.
 But what -- what about preclusion on other courts?
 The --
 In litigation in other courts. They -- did -- did they ever say there is no claim or issue preclusion in other courts as a result of -- of our denials?
 The court of appeals was only examining its effect on itself, and wasn't examining on subsequent courts.
 And any -- any court, I mean, in -- in theory, can -- can revise its own -- its own opinions. But the -- I mean, we look to preclusion really on -- on the effect of the judgment in another court, and I take it they have not ruled on that.
 Well, but both -- both opinions, in Bobenal and Berry, the court said it was not a ruling on the merits. In other words, if a subsequent court then said it was a merits determination, it would be inconsistent with the holding from Bobenal and it would be inconsistent with Berry with saying the merits have not been reached.
 And they have said the same, you tell us, as to Federal courts.
 Right. The Federal courts have --
 I mean, that's another court, and -- and they are not asserting that they've decided on the merits in Federal court.
 The Federal courts have been ambiguous. In other words, the Abela case -- they said --
 I'm not talking about what the Federal courts have said. I'm talking about what -- what Michigan has said and -- and what the court of -- has the court of appeals spoken on that subject?
 Yes. The court of appeals in the Bobenal case said, in fact, examining virtually the identical language of the issue raised here, that this was not a decision on the merits and that it was not itself bound as law of the case because the merits had not been resolved. I think the Bulger case is kind of the paramount case because it is the Michigan Supreme Court conferring the proper legal understanding of the applications for leave, and it said that the nature of the leave is discretionary. I think that fits with common sense understanding because there is no right to have the merits reviewed. Otherwise, it wouldn't make sense to say the application were discretionary if a defendant would have a claim to have any error corrected. Otherwise, he would have a claim on the court of appeals. The court of appeals has full authority to make the determination that even if everything alleged is true, it's not going to correct the error.
 Look, this is what I'm -- I'm interested in. It seems like Michigan is unique here. Why not do, if you're worried about resources, what other States have done? You just say, okay, of course, you have a right to an appeal and, of course, you have a lawyer. We'll give it to you if you're poor. But, by the way, if you want to plead guilty, we're not entering into that deal unless you waive it.
 Well, I think that, in a way, Michigan provides a -- a greater protection by enabling itself. What the court of appeals is essentially doing with its review is for the -- for a case where there's a -- an -- an egregious set of facts, it can reach in and grant an application and review it on the merits. It's a -- it's -- it's a kind of a determination about resource allocation, making kind of the hard choices about policy decisions that States have to make.
 Is this a case where it would meet the standard for granting leave to appeal?
 No. This -- for -- for Mr. Halbert --
 Because of the error in scoring?
 In fact, anyone who's very familiar with the Michigan guideline system would recognize that Mr. Halbert, if anything, received a break in the scoring of the guidelines. That -- that ultimately the Offense Variable 13 is a very easy answer to why it was properly scored.
 You take the position that in fact there was no error in scoring.
 No. The -- there was no error in scoring. The Offense Variable 13 claim relates to three -- whether the defendant had committed three -- three offenses against a person within the -- within 5 years. Michigan allows a determination based on preponderance even if there was no conviction entered. Mr. Halbert was a serial child molester who admitted to having sexually assaulted his 14-year-old stepdaughter, a 10-year-old girl, a 6-year-old girl. All that information was in the presentence investigation report. There was no objection to the scoring of Offense Variable 13 because he admitted to the sexual assaults. There was -- it was never raised --
 I thought at page 36 of your brief that you agreed that he made a correct -- that there was an error in -- of application.
 Right. The Offense Variable 9 was -- there was an error with respect to that, but it wouldn't affect the ultimate position he would be placed in the -- in the brackets. In fact, the only error that did occur that would have affected the scoring was one in his favor, which would have put him -- put him in a higher bracket. So he in fact --
 So there were at least two errors. How they balance out I guess is your view they didn't hurt him at all.
 Well, in fact, if anything, helped him. But on a more basic level --
 Is that correct? There were two errors in the --
 Yes.
 -- at least.
 Yes.
 And he contends there were two more, and that hasn't been resolved.
 That's -- that's right, but I -- I think those claims are --
 So at -- at least we have to assume that it was not an error-free sentencing proceeding.
 Yes. Well, more importantly, the kinds of issues at play for the sentencing cases are all like this. They -- they relate to the minimum sentencing. Michigan systems then determine from a maximum -- from a minimum to a maximum which will get a -- a range of time. All the -- these sentencing guideline cases relate to the minimum sentence. For Mr. Halbert as a sex offender, this is really a question about when he will be eligible for release from the Department of Corrections. He's going to be facing 30 years because all the sentences in Michigan are set by the statute. So these oral arguments relating lesser liberty --
 May I ask another question? Am I correct in assuming from the order entered on page 43 of the joint appendix that even though there were lots of errors there, the fact that they were not raised until after December 11th would have precluded review at the trial court level?
 No. His -- the point of the trial court there was that the defendant, if he wanted to withdraw his plea, should have raised that before the sentencing itself because the court has discretion before sentencing to let him out of his plea. After sentencing, he has to show that the plea was invalid. So his time -- he was untimely trying to withdraw his plea because he was concerned about consecutive as against concurrent sentences. In -- in summary, the -- the Michigan system -- the -- with the limited date to the review and the kinds of issues from plea-based convictions that are at issue are not -- are lesser liberty interest questions because they have to do with amount of punishment. The Michigan system extends the relationship of trial counsel to the defendant and asks the trial counsel to raise the motions regarding post-conviction motions which will enable him to have a factual record from which to advance his claims. He's not left to shift for himself, that there is a counsel appointed to identify those meritorious claims --
 But if the counsel happens to be incompetent, that's the end of the ball game.
 And that's always the circumstance for a defendant who's bringing a discretionary application where his prior counsel was ineffective, that he can be left to identify the meritorious claims on his own and to make the argument of ineffective assistance of counsel. That's true in Ross as well where your first -- where your first appeal as of right, your -- your appellate counsel is incompetent. You're going to be left to identify those meritorious claims, raise the issue of ineffective assistance of counsel, and to try to avoid procedural bars that you'll be facing. Every system is going to have to draw that line and to say that at some point you're not going to get appointed another attorney. Just because there's access to the system doesn't mean there always has to be another attorney appointed. Otherwise, the point is that you would have to have two attorneys make a review on your case, whereas there is no right to an appeal here that this Court has recognized that ultimately where there -- since there is no right to appeal, that he had an opportunity to have a trial counsel --
 But, of course, if he had had paid counsel, he would not have had these handicaps.
 That's right, that the -- there is some advantage, but that's not the ultimate answer.
 Competent paid counsel.
 Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Restuccia. Mr. Schaerr, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Like the Sixth Circuit's invalidation of this Michigan statute in the Tesmer case, petitioner's attempt to invalidate that statute here runs counter to this Court's longstanding tradition of deference to the people of the individual States and to their legislatures in the design and implementation of their criminal justice systems. As the Court said in Coleman v. Thompson, a case like this is a case about federalism because it involves the respect that Federal courts must pay to States and the States' procedural rules. Respect for the State's choices is especially important here because, as the Court put it in Medina v. California, preventing and dealing with crime is much more the business of the States than it is of the Federal Government. And therefore, the Court said we should not lightly construe the Constitution so as to intrude upon the administration of justice by the individual States. And -- and as to the question of -- of when to provide State-paid counsel, as Justice O'Connor reminded us in Murray v. Giarratano, that's a choice that should be one of legislative choice, especially since it involves difficult policy considerations and the allocation of scarce legal resources.
 Now, I take it that the basic rule that we've followed -- and this is what people are arguing about -- could be a criminal trial or proceeding, plea, something in a trial court.
 Right.
 It emerges with a judgment, and then there is going to be the first review. Call it a leave to appeal, call it an appeal, call it whatever you want, but it is the first review. And in those two instances, State, if the defendant is poor, give him a lawyer. That's simple. That's clear. Everybody could understand it. They may not even have a lot of legal arguments. Now, what significant -- what does that prevent a State from doing that it's reasonably important for a State to want to do?
 Well, again, Justice Breyer, it's a question of allocating scarce legal resources. If you -- and this case is a perfect example of that. This case is not -- does not involve an appeal as of right. It involves a discretionary appeal, and -- and that's the vast bulk of -- of appeals that are addressed by the -- by the Michigan Court of Appeals. So if you impose here on the State of Michigan an obligation to provide counsel in all of those cases, you are, in essence, forcing the people of Michigan to reallocate their legal resources away from other cases or you're requiring the legislature to increase taxes to pay for that -- to pay for that --
 Is there any other State that's done it the way Michigan has?
 I don't believe there's another State that's done it exactly the same way. But I -- but I would point out -- and I think this is important, Justice Breyer -- that -- that at least according to the Michigan Supreme Court in the Bulger case, the majority of States don't allow any appeal at all from a plea-based conviction. 21 of them rule it out entirely and expressly, and another 17 effectively rule out appeals from plea-based convictions by -- by allowing prosecutors to impose that -- impose a waiver as a condition of entering into a plea. So -- so the relevant universe for comparison is quite small here. It's really 12 States at most, and -- and Michigan sort of fits within the middle of those States in terms of the amount of resources that it provides and opportunities that it provides.
 Are you saying -- I just want to be clear -- that even if this defendant had had paid counsel, he would not have had any right to appeal to the intermediate court?
 That's correct. It -- it's discretionary, and that's clear not just -- not just from analysis of the -- of the Michigan courts' opinions, but from the provision of the -- of -- but from the constitutional provision that -- that created this entire controversy, which was added in 1994. It's article I, section 20. And that constitutional provision itself draws a sharp distinction between appeals of right and appeals by leave of court. So even if the Michigan courts wanted to have a system of -- of mandatory appeals, they're now precluded by the Michigan constitution from doing that. And so -- and so clearly, if this Court adheres to the sharp distinction and -- which I think is equally sharp and clear, that this Court has made between -- between appeals of right and discretionary appeals --
 But it's not that -- it's not that sharp because it was -- in Ross, it was the second appeal. So here we have one factor that is like Douglas, Griffin, and one factor that's like Ross. You can't say that it falls in one camp more than the other. This is the first-tier appeal.
 I -- I understand, Justice Ginsburg, but -- but that's not the distinction that I understand this Court's decisions draw. Several times since Douglas and Ross, this Court has said that the right to paid counsel addressed in Douglas extends only to the first appeal of right and no further. And that's -- that's Coleman and -- and Finley, among others.
 Of course, the question is whether the words, of right, were essential to that statement.
 I -- I'm assuming that the Court was being careful in its -- in its choice of words, and I believe it was because that -- that --
 Because then it wouldn't have needed to include the word first.
 I'm sorry?
 But then the word first was redundant, not the words, of right.
 No, I don't --
 You can have two appeals of right --
 That's right.
 -- I suppose if you wanted to.
 That's right. Now, so -- so the real question here, with regard to the right to paid counsel, is does it make sense to extend what the Court did in Douglas to this new situation. We think it does not. This Court's decisions, Ross and Justice Kennedy's concurrence in -- in Murray, as I recall, draw -- draw a distinction between the removal of barriers that the State imposes to the exercise of litigation rights on the one hand and, on the other hand, subsidizing, affirmatively subsidizing litigation rights And -- and I think this Court's care in distinguishing between appeals of right and discretionary appeals reflects a desire to cabin Douglas and -- and to avoid any further excursions into the area of subsidies. And we think that's a -- we think that's -- we think that's good as a matter of policy for the Court to do that, for one thing --
 May -- may I ask you one thing lest we forget it? Is -- is your argument premised on the assumption that a refusal to hear an appeal is -- is not regarded as a determination on the merits and thus preclusive?
 No, I don't think so. I -- I think that helps the argument. But in fact, there are lots of discretionary appeals or discretionary appellate proceedings that -- that do result in decisions on the merits. This Court, for example, sometimes summarily affirms or reverses on cert, and the fact that the Court does that doesn't create --
 Well, we accept cert before we do that. I thought the question was that the denial of an application for appeal does not have any merits consequence. Wasn't that the question?
 Yes, yes.
 Does the denial of an application for appeal have any merits consequence?
 Well, as -- if -- if that's the question, I -- I would defer to -- to Michigan counsel --
 No. But I'm asking whether that's a premise of your argument because the consequences of your argument are going to be very different depending on whether that is the premise or whether it isn't, whether that premise is true or whether it isn't.
 I -- I think the distinction is -- is not necessarily whether the decisions are on the merits or not. I think the distinction is between appeals of right and -- and appeals that are discretionary.
 If it's always on the merits, it's an -- it's an appeal of right, it seems to me. How can you have a -- a discretionary appeal which always decides the merits of the case?
 Well, I -- in -- in fact, I don't think that's what happens in Michigan, and -- and I think the --
 So your -- the assumption of your argument is that it is not on the merits. I.e., it is not a merits determination if there's a denial and hence there is no preclusion.
 I -- I think that's true. Whether it's an assumption of the argument, I'm not -- I'm not so sure.
 You're talking about a piece of paper, that first piece of paper saying to the appeals court, appeals court, please hear my appeal.
 Right.
 And then it lists a whole lot of reasons like a cert petition.
 Right.
 And those are likely to do with the merits of the case. I mean, they'll tell all the horrible things that went on. And the question is, is he going to have a lawyer to help him with that piece of paper or not?
 That's right.
 All right. Now -- now, it sounds to me just the kind of thing you'd write if you had an appeal on the merits too. No. It's even harder. Even harder. You've got to convince them to take it.
 It -- it is more difficult, but -- but the disparity between --
 So why draw that distinction? The piece of paper is the same, even harder to write, needs the lawyer as much, first chance he gets after the trial court. Why draw that distinction?
 Well, again, because -- because if you -- if you broaden the right to State-paid counsel, as -- as in Douglas, you're going to require States to -- to reallocate resources to that priority and away from other priorities. Also, if you -- if you subsidize litigation in the name of providing adequate access to courts or meaningful access to courts, then there's going to be a lot of litigation in the lower Federal courts about exactly how much of a subsidy is necessary to reach that standard. And also, if -- and this is particularly important here I think. If you require States to subsidize the exercise of a right that they're not required to provide in the first place, like the right to seek review of a -- of a plea-based conviction, then you give the States a strong incentive to cut back on or eliminate that right altogether. And -- and, you know, who knows? But perhaps that's what's going on in the -- in the trend in the States away from providing this right. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Schaerr. Mr. Moran, you have 3 minutes remaining.
 Thank you. I have to begin by correcting several misstatements of fact and of Michigan law. First of all, Mr. Schaerr just said that only a dozen States, I believe, allow for appeals from guilty pleas. That's not correct. Every State in the United States currently allows for appeals from guilty plea -- pleas. The Bulger case did say that. They cited a --
 Appeals as of right?
 Not necessarily. As I cited in my brief, a number of States allow for applications or petitions from guilty pleas, but every State has a first- tier direct appeal from guilty pleas. The Bulger -- the Michigan Supreme Court in Bulger cited a -- an article from an Arizona Attorney magazine that was simply incorrect on that. Secondly, on the issue of what is the effect of a order denying leave to appeal for lack of merit on the grounds presented, the State continues to rely on McKenzie v. Smith, an earlier Sixth Circuit opinion, People v. Berry, and Bobenal v. Saginaw Investment. None of those cases uses the phrase, lack of merit on the grounds presented. That phrase does not appear in any of those three cases. The Berry and the Bobenal cases, those are Michigan Court of Appeals cases before 1981. Beginning in 1981, in a series of three cases, People v. Douglas, People v. Hayden, and People v. Wiley, the Michigan Court of Appeals held unambiguously that our orders denying applications or remand orders, in that case, for lack of merit on the grounds presented, was law of the case.
 What's the effect of the constitutional provision then?
 I'm sorry? I -- I don't --
 If that's so, what is the effect of the constitutional provision that Mr. Schaerr read?
 The Michigan constitutional provision? It changes the way in which guilty plea appeals proceed. Before 1994, there were other types of appeals that had to proceed by application for leave to appeal, primarily late appeals. If the appeal was filed too late, it had to proceed by application for leave to appeal. In 1994, as a result of the constitutional amendment, guilt plea appeals now have to proceed by application for leave to appeal. That's constitutional. We have no problem with that, and that is the method by which the caseload management problems have been solved. They have been solved.
 I -- I -- you -- you have the wrong one. I meant the one that said that applications to the court of appeals are -- are -- require leave to appeal. What's the effect of that?
 The -- I assume you're still referring to article I, section 20 of the Michigan constitution.
 Yes. It says that for the court of appeals, you need leave to appeal. I thought they were doing something there. What were they doing?
 They were saying that first-tier felony appeals in Michigan following pleas require leave of the court, require an application for leave to appeal, like late appeals from trial cases do. But all of those appeals are still decided on the merits with preclusive effect for law of the case purposes. And the Sixth Circuit specifically dealt with that in -- in the Abela case. McKenzie v. Smith never -- never mentions anything about the lack of merit in the grounds presented. The resource allocations point is simply that not all of these guilty plea appeals are -- lead to full argument and full briefing, and that's fine. Michigan can do that. But what Michigan cannot do, as a result of Ellis and Douglas, is for that first gatekeeping part of the appeal, which is where the court has to decide is there merit in this case, to make the indigent shift for himself. And so in -- in Smith v. Robbins, this Court, specifically referring back to the Ellis case, said that the problem that the Court identified in Ellis and that became part of the constitutional minimum in Douglas, was that the old California procedure did not require -- I see my time is up. Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice.
 Thank you, Mr. Moran. The case is submitted.
 We will now hear argument in Brown against Payton. Ms. Cortina.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: In this case, the Ninth Circuit violated AEDPA by reversing the California Supreme Court's decision affirming Payton's 1982 death sentence. The California Supreme Court applied the exact right case, namely Boyde v. California, in the very manner contemplated that -- by that decision when assessing Payton's claim that his jury misunderstood the court's instructions and, in particular, factor (k) so as to unconstitutionally preclude consideration of his mitigating evidence. The California Supreme Court's application of Boyde is precisely the type of good faith application of Federal constitutional law to which AEDPA demands deference. It is manifestly not objectively unreasonable, and this can be demonstrated in three aspects of the decision. The first is that the California Supreme Court recognized Boyde's specific holding that factor (k) facially comported with the Eighth Amendment. The second is --
 Well, I thought the holding was that factor (k), standing alone, does -- does not raise a -- does -- does not, standing alone, raise a question of reasonable probability of -- of misunderstanding or misapplication of the law. And that's not what they're claiming here. They're claiming here that there was something much more than (k) standing alone. As I understand it, they're claiming that the difference between this and Boyde and why this is not a standalone kind of case is that the prosecutor deliberately argued or argued law that was in fact wrong and -- and continued to do so even after the court interrupted the argument and that the court never gave an instruction that corrected the erroneous statements of law that the prosecutor had made. So that's -- that's why they're -- they're saying this is not a Boyde situation.
 Your Honor, Boyde has two specific components to its decision, which is, first, what factor (k) means standing alone, and you need to resolve that issue, which California did, in deciding the impact of the prosecutor's misstatements concerning factor (k). So that, first, you start from the premise, as the California Supreme Court did, in following Boyde, that factor (k) facially directed for consideration of Payton's mitigating evidence.
 Well, no, no. The -- the mitigating evidence that Boyde held could be considered without a -- (k) being a bar, was mitigating evidence about the -- the character of the individual prior to or at least up to the moment of the crime. So this is -- this is different kind of evidence, and I -- I mean, this is post-crime evidence. And -- and I don't see that -- that Boyde's holding is so broad as obviously to cover this at all. It might be a -- it would be a -- a closer question if it hadn't been for the prosecutor's argument and the judge's failure to correct it. But even -- even without those elements, there would be a serious question whether Boyde covered this at all.
 Your Honor, the -- respectfully I disagree. I believe that the California Supreme Court correctly and -- and reasonably determined that Boyde's holding encompassed Payton's character mitigating -- Payton's mitigating character evidence because the holding in Boyde -- or the issue directly presented by Boyde was whether factor (k) limited consideration to circumstances related to the crime or allowed for non-crime related mitigating evidence in deciding the appropriate penalty.
 What do we make of the Chief Justice's clear statement, not once but twice, in Boyde? The prosecutor never suggested that background and character evidence could not be considered. So mustn't we take Boyde with that qualification when we have a case where the prosecutor, indeed, suggested that this information could not be taken into consideration as a mitigating factor?
 No, Justice Ginsburg. First, you must assess factor (k) facially and that's what Boyde did. Then the next question is did the prosecutor's misstatements concerning factor (k) mislead the jury to believe that they could no longer consider Payton's mitigating character evidence. And that would be the second component of Boyde which is a general test for assessing the reasonable likelihood a jury misunderstood the instructions in the context of the proceedings. And the particularly relevant and important inquiry in this case is the California Supreme Court's application of Boyde's reasonable likelihood test in the context of the proceedings.
 Well, do we take -- do we take the case on the assumption that the trial court erred in not giving a curative instruction and in saying, well, this is a matter for the attorneys to argue? You -- you don't argue about what a statute means. That's a question of law. You don't argue that. You can argue the facts, that it's mitigating or not mitigating or that it's extenuating or not extenuating, which is I think how you can interpret a lot of this. But it -- it seems to me that the trial judge does make a mistake when he says, well, well, this is for the -- this is for them to argue when the -- the point of the objection was that there was a misinterpretation of the instruction. That's a legal point.
 And that is a fact that was expressly considered by the California Supreme Court in appropriately applying Boyde's general test for whether the jury misunderstood the court's instructions and an instruction that facially called for consideration --
 Not that -- that the jury misunderstood the judge's instruction, that there was no instruction. I mean, the -- the picture that's given here is the defense attorney says, I can use this to mitigate. The prosecutor says this is not legitimate mitigating evidence, and he said that several times. And the judge said, well, you can both argue it, and the judge never instructed the jury. He left it to the prosecutors to argue the law to the jury and for the jury to make that legal determination. It -- it seems to me that that -- that is surely an error. Now, you could still say, well, even so, it was harmless. But -- but I don't think -- can there be any doubt when the judge tells the attorneys, you argue the law to the jury and let the jury decide what the law is?
 Yes. There -- there is a reasonable likelihood that the jury did not take the prosecutor's statements so as to preclude consideration of Payton's mitigating evidence because the prosecutor's statements cannot --
 Well, even -- even if -- even if that's argument is -- is on point, just taking your -- your response on its own terms, where do you get a reasonable likelihood?
 Because the prosecutor's statements cannot be construed in a vacuum. You have to look, as Boyde required and as California did, at the context of the entire proceedings. What we're here -- what the jury was doing in Payton was deciding whether Payton should live or die, the sentencing determination.
 Well, but let's get specific. You -- you said there isn't a reasonable possibility. Why? Get -- get down to facts. Why isn't there a reasonable possibility?
 Why there is not a reasonable likelihood the jury misunderstood?
 Yes. The prosecutor stands there and twice says, before the judge interrupts him and after the judge interrupts him -- says, you cannot legally consider this evidence. It does not fall within (k), and the judge never corrects it. Why is there not a -- a reasonable likelihood of -- of jury mistake?
 One, Your Honor, the judge admonished the jury that the prosecutor's statements were that of an advocate, and that --
 No. Precisely, if I recall -- and you correct me if I'm wrong, but I thought what the judge said was that the prosecutor's statements were -- were not evidence. Of course, they're not evidence. The issue isn't whether they were evidence. They were statements of the law. The judge didn't say anything about whether they were correct or incorrect statements of the law. It seems to me that the judge's response to the objection was totally beside the point.
 The -- nevertheless, the judge's response relegated the prosecutor's statements as to his personal opinion as to that of a -- some -- as -- as -- of -- of -- to argument, which is a statement of an advocate. And the jury, from the time it was empanelled, guilt phase, and through the penalty phase, and at the concluding instructions was repeatedly instructed that they would be getting the instruction on the law from the court. And here --
 And the court didn't give them an instruction on this contested point.
 I respectfully disagree.
 He didn't come out and say, yes, you can consider this under (k). He never said that.
 No, but (k) says you can consider it under (k).
 (k) says you can consider evidence that -- that goes to the gravity of the crime. I will be candid to say I think you're stretching things about as far as you can stretch, as Boyde held, that -- that character evidence pre and up to the time of the crime can be considered reasonably under that factor. But certainly evidence of what an individual did after the crime is committed does not naturally follow within (k) at all, and I don't know why any juror would consider it unless a judge came out and said flatly you can.
 Your Honor, the California Supreme Court reasonably applied Boyde's holding, that factor (k) did call for consideration of character evidence, and that's precisely what Payton presented --
 Well, what if we conclude that there was an error here? Is there a harmless error argument that you fall back on?
 Yes, Your Honor, there is a harmless error, but before we even get to harmless error, the fact that you disagree with the ultimate conclusion of the California Supreme Court under AEDPA is not sufficient.
 May I ask --
 The California Supreme Court's decision --
 May I ask a question that goes sort of to the beginning? What is your position on whether or not the prosecutor correctly stated the law?
 The State concedes, and as the California Supreme Court recognized, the prosecutor misstated the law, but the jury would not --
 Do you also concede he did so deliberately? Do you concede there was prosecutorial misconduct is what I'm really asking.
 Absolutely not, Your Honor. The prosecutor did not commit misconduct. The prosecutor made a mistake, and the misconduct analysis, which is similar to what Boyde contemplated when they set forth the general standard for assessing whether a jury would misunderstood -- misunderstand an instruction is -- is almost the same when -- when you're analyzing whether the question is prosecutorial misconduct. Boyde sets forth the test for how to assess a misstatement by the prosecutor, and Boyde said that at the first instance, a statement of the prosecutor is not to be considered as having the same force as instructions from the court. And that principle was recognized by the California Supreme Court and reinforced --
 That -- that statement went to whether the jury was apt to accept it, not to the question of whether the prosecutor acted improperly.
 I'm sorry, Your Honor. The -- in this case, the prosecutor made a mistake. I don't think that there's any evidence to support the conclusion that the prosecutor committed misconduct in this case, particularly --
 Well, I -- I can see that a -- a prosecutor could say, you know, this isn't factor (k) evidence, as a way of saying that this evidence is of little weight. He did say at -- at one -- at one time, you have not heard any legal evidence of mitigation, and -- and that -- that's the troublesome part.
 Your Honor, the -- the State concedes that the -- the prosecutor did make misstatements, but I think that the bulk -- as you pointed out, the bulk of the prosecutor's argument went to the weight to be attributed to Payton's mitigating evidence, and actually most of the argument by the prosecutor indicating that Payton's evidence didn't mitigate the seriousness of his rape and murder is -- there were similar arguments that were made by the prosecutor in Boyde and which Boyde found were not objectionable. But again, the important scrutiny is that the California Supreme Court evaluated the prosecutor's statements within the correct analytical framework matrix established by Boyde. They considered all the correct principles, the -- the effect of argument of counsel. They considered the instructions, and like Boyde, they found that factor (k) facially directed the consideration --
 Suppose -- suppose I were to take the view that it is a violation of clearly established law for a court to allow a prosecutor repeatedly to misstate the law, misinform the jury about what the law is on a life or death question without correcting that misstatement, without saying to the jury, jury, it's not for the prosecutor to argue what the law is. I tell you what the law. If the judge doesn't do that, then that meets any standard of violating clearly established law about which there should be no doubt that when the prosecutor makes a misstatement on a life or death question, it is the judge's obligation to say, jury, he is wrong. You take your instruction from me and here's my instruction. Suppose that's my view of this case. I don't -- Boyde and all these other cases -- it just strikes me that that's clearly wrong. What do I do with that?
 Well, you can find that the court was wrong and not like what you did -- what the court did, but the inquiry is whether the jury misunderstood the instructions as a result of the court's conduct. And that requires an analysis of the context of the proceedings, and that is precisely what the California Supreme Court did. They --
 Well, now you're getting to the question I think that Justice O'Connor raised a few minutes ago about are you urging, yes, this is error, but it was harmless?
 No, I am not agreeing that this was error at all. I agree that the prosecutor made a misstatement and that the California Supreme Court thoroughly and properly evaluated that statement --
 Well, but just on that point, if the prosecutor makes a misstatement, doesn't the trial judge have an obligation to correct it if it's significant?
 The -- in this case --
 Or am I wrong? Or am I wrong about that? The judge just kind of watches the ship sail over the waterfall?
 The -- I mean, the -- the trial court did correct it. It may not be the sufficient correction in this Court's eye, but the court did give an admonition that relegated the prosecutor's statements to that of the advocate and not to the instructions of the court.
 Well, what if the prosecutor had said several times to the jury during the course of his arguments that the burden of proof by the State is by a preponderance, not beyond a reasonable doubt? And the judge just says the prosecutor's arguments are just that, they're not the law. I'll instruct you. But he never says anything. Is that okay?
 It's not what we'd optimally want the court to do, but that's not the inquiry that's presented and answered by Boyde. The question is as a result of what happened. Trials are not error-free. We wish that they were, but they're not. The question is how do you respond to when a -- when a prosecutor makes a misstatement of law. And Boyde addresses that question. Boyde --
 Well, normally we would think the trial judge would correct a misstatement of the law by counsel. We would normally think that, wouldn't we?
 Yes.
 And it wasn't clearly done here. I mean, the -- the jury was reminded that arguments of counsel are just that. But there was no attempt to correct what appeared to be a misstatement.
 The court's admonition was sufficient. But we're -- we -- we have to respond to the case that's before you.
 What -- what admonition was sufficient? The court said something about evidence and everybody -- I mean, there's no question what the prosecutor said isn't evidence. But he didn't tell them he has misstated the law. We're not talking about -- evidence is not at issue at all. Neither side suggests that it is. It's a question is what is the law that governs this controversy, what is the law that the jury must apply to make a life or death decision.
 Right, and what was --
 And -- and you --
 Sorry.
 -- you said the judge corrected it, and I read this joint appendix. I could not find any correction.
 The court's admonition that the prosecutor's argument was not evidence but argument of counsel relegated the statements of the prosecutor to that of an advocate and did not take the prosecutor's arguments and elevate it in place of the instructions given --
 Then -- then it -- then it has another problem with it because then the judge is saying that's an argument. Jury, you've heard arguments on both sides. You decide. But it isn't for the jury to decide what the law is.
 But the analysis is whether there was a reasonable likelihood the jury misunderstood the court's instructions so as to preclude consideration of Payton's mitigating evidence, and that --
 Did the judge instruct the jury that you are to consider all of the evidence which has been received during any part of the trial?
 Yes, Your Honor, and actually that's one of the inquiries that Boyde required, is that you look at the instruction itself, the other instructions, and that's an inquiry the California Supreme Court did, in fact, conduct. And that is, the jury was presented with -- with a instruction that said, you shall consider all the evidence unless otherwise instructed, and nothing out of any of the factors (a) through (k) limited the jury's consideration of Payton's mitigating evidence or precluded -- pardon me --
 Oh, are you taking the position that as a matter of California procedure, the jury was entitled to consider matters that -- matter that was not within (a) through (k)?
 I think that the instructions encompass the jury considering something not specifically in (a) through (k) for purposes of mitigating evidence because the instructions say, you shall consider the evidence presented, and that was Payton's evidence --
 Have the California courts said that?
 That?
 Have the California courts said that (a) through (k) are -- is not intended to be exhaustive at the pre-Payton -- pardon me. Yes. Have they said that pre-Payton?
 I don't think that that issue has been presented and decided by the California Supreme Court specifically --
 I -- I thought the case was being argued to us -- correct me if I'm wrong -- on -- on the theory that this was factor (k) evidence.
 It is our position that it -- it does fall within factor (k) evidence, but in deciding whether the -- whether Payton's jury was unconstitutionally precluded from considering the evidence, you look to the -- all the instructions. And when you consider the direction to consider all -- that you shall consider all the evidence and then the concluding instruction --
 But Ms. Cortina, the -- the red brief -- maybe it's not accurate. They say the instruction was all the evidence received during any part of the trial in this case, except as you may hereafter be instructed, and then that followed what -- the factor (k) discussion came after that. So would it not have been possible that the jury would have thought except for the following things? Or is there something more that I missed?
 No. The written instruction followed the arguments of counsels. And what -- and so no, there was no instruction after that.
 So if they misunderstood the factor (k) instruction, they would have thought they could not consider all the evidence.
 There was no reasonable likelihood that they felt that they could not consider Payton's evidence under factor (k), and the California Supreme Court --
 Well, if they believed the prosecutor, they would have thought they couldn't.
 But there -- but as analyzed by the California Supreme Court, it is not reasonably likely that the jury would have accepted the prosecutor's first few misstatements. And as I was saying, to do so, the jury would have had to --
 But all -- all I'm directing my inquiry to is to the significance of the instruction to consider all the evidence. I think it's they could consider all the evidence, except that which may not be admissible, as I now -- or may not be relevant as I shall hereafter instruct you.
 However, nothing in the following instruction says you shall not consider Payton's mitigating evidence.
 No, but the prosecutor said that if you interpret the last instruction properly, you shall not do so.
 He said that it didn't fall within factor (k). However, the -- the jury would -- there is no reasonable likelihood and the California Supreme Court was not objectively unreasonable, including -- in concluding that the -- that the jury would have accepted the prosecutor's first few misstatements and chosen to disregard Payton's mitigating evidence because the jury just sat through eight witnesses testifying to Payton's post-crime remorse and rehabilitation. They sat through that without any misstatements by the prosecutor. So they recognized that they had heard this evidence and that it was relevant and that it was subject to consideration. Then they heard the arguments of counsel concerning the weight to be attributed to Payton's mitigating evidence. And although the prosecutor did make the misstatements, his statements were relegated to that of an advocate. And to conclude that the jury would disregard the repeated instructions to follow the -- to take the law from the court and their inevitable, long-held societal beliefs that remorse and rehabilitation are relevant to making an appropriate moral reasoned response in deciding the life or death sentence is not a reasonable conclusion. And we know that the fact -- in fact, that the jury did consider Payton's mitigating evidence by virtue of the questions that the juries -- the jury asked the court during deliberations. The jury asked whether Payton would be eligible for parole and whether any change in the law could retroactively make him eligible for parole. You only get to a consideration of whether -- what the effect is of saving Payton's life, under the California sentencing scheme that was -- existed at that time, if you believe that there's mitigation evidence to consider because California, at the time of Payton's sentencing, instructed the jury that if the aggravating circumstances outweigh the mitigating circumstances, you shall impose death. Their --
 They -- they might not have thought that the aggravating circumstances were entitled to -- to great weight. I mean, we don't know how they evaluated the aggravating circumstances.
 That might be one reasonable conclusion, but the other reasonable conclusion --
 But I mean, that -- that is a possible conclusion, and therefore, it doesn't follow from the fact that they raised the question about life without parole that they necessarily had found -- that they were necessarily considering the mitigating evidence.
 It's a reasonable inference to be made from the questions asked, and that's what you're looking at.
 It's -- it's one possibility. Isn't that all?
 It's one reasonable inference, and that's what's the important inquiry, is that the trial -- the California Supreme Court reasonably considered the relevant, pertinent facts and all the applicable law in reaching a decision that Payton's jury was not unconstitutionally precluded from considering his mitigating character evidence. And I think that -- that the California Supreme Court's decision demonstrates that it applied Boyde to the letter faithfully and methodically, and that it -- it considered all the relevant facts and that its decision under these circumstances is manifestly not objectively unreasonable. And that is the requirement, and that is the inquiry that we're here today to resolve. The -- the Ninth Circuit failed to give the appropriate deference to the California Supreme Court's decision in deciding that the penalty should be -- Payton's penalty should be reversed. And the Ninth Circuit instead conflated objectively unreasonable with a determination that it personally felt that there was constitutional error and doesn't respect the distinction recognized in AEDPA between a incorrect decision -- or a correct decision, incorrect decision, unreasonable decision, and the higher threshold of objectively unreasonable. And unless this Court has any further questions, Justice Stevens, I would like to reserve the remainder of my time.
 How long did the penalty phase take?
 The penalty phase took about a day with eight witnesses.
 Thank you. Mr. Gits.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: I'd like to start off, if I may, by addressing some of the points that were brought up just earlier, and I'd like to indicate to this Court that the California Supreme Court has held that factors (a) through (k) are the exclusive considerations that the jury must encompass in deciding whether or not to impose death or life.
 Has factor (k) been supplemented with a CALJIC instruction since Payton?
 It has. In 1983, 2 years after Payton's trial, it was supplemented to include all of the mitigating evidence that this Court has indicated the jury is entitled to consider. But what is important --
 Excuse me. Do they still call it factor (k) or do they just have a supplemental instruction that follows factor (k)?
 It's been a couple of years since I've done a death penalty trial, but I think it's still called factor (k). It's just supplemented and changed that way. The second thing is that this Court has indicated some concern over the jury question that was raised first in -- in the State's reply argument. And I need to put the Court, I think, in -- in proper context as to what occurred in -- in that jury question. The case was given to the jury at 11:55 on the date of -- of the determination, and the jury was told to select a foreman. 5 minutes -- they went into the deliberations room. 5 minutes later they came out and went to lunch. They didn't commence their deliberations thereafter until 1 o'clock. At 1:10, they came out with a -- the question that is now before the Court. And I want to suggest to this Court that it is not reasonable to believe that during that 10-minute span of time the jury considered the -- whether or not factor (k) applied.
 And what was the question?
 The question -- there were really two questions. One -- and I'm paraphrasing -- is there any possibility Mr. Payton could be released on parole if we give him life, and the second one is if the law is amended, could that be construed to be retroactively applicable to Mr. Payton. Those were the two questions.
 Those don't sound as if they thought his conversion to Christianity made a difference.
 I think, Your Honor, what the jury articulated is what this Court has seen on many occasions, the jury's concern about does life without possibility mean life without.
 Yes.
 They never went beyond that at this point in time. So what I'm suggesting to this Court is that the short span that they had to write that question, which I agree, given enough time, might permit an inference that they did consider factor (k), isn't applicable in this case.
 Well, an equal inference is they just felt that it was entitled to no weight at all given the horrific nature of this -- of this crime.
 Yes, I agree. And my position isn't that -- that the short span of -- you know, assists our position. Our position is that this won't assist this Court in arriving at a decision about whether the jury considered it.
 And you have to show there's a reasonable likelihood that the jury might have come to an opposite conclusion.
 Yes. And Boyde teaches that the way to do that is to look at the context of the entire case in conjunction with the -- the instruction that was given in this case. And I want to start out that I -- I agree with the State that the first thing this Court should do is look at the instruction standing alone. And I want to indicate that without reference to the context of the case, the instruction standing alone does not support the inference that Payton's post-crime evidence could be considered. Now, I agree that in the context of the case, the context of the case could change that consideration. For instance, if the court, as this -- some member of this Court already indicated, told the jury that factor (k) is to encompass Payton's evidence, or even if the prosecutor may have said to the jury during his argument, ladies and gentlemen, although it might not seem like Payton's evidence could be considered by you under factor (k), in fact it can, then we would be left with a situation very similar to Boyde where there really is no argument among counsel as to whether or not the evidence could be subsumed under (k). And that, in the context of that case, would permit it.
 Well, on -- on that point -- and I -- I recognize it's -- it's not nearly as clean as the hypothetical you present -- he did say -- this is the prosecutor. The law in its simplicity is that if the aggravating factors outweigh the mitigating factors, the sentence should be death, and so let's just line these up, and then he talks about the -- the conversion. So there were other parts of his argument that indicated by one interpretation this is not mitigating under special (k) -- under factor (k). But here he does say that you line that up and you weigh one against the other.
 I -- I would respond to that by saying two things. He does say that, but after he says, ladies and gentlemen, I want to address some of -- of Payton's evidence. I'm not suggesting and I'm -- and I don't believe that it applies under factor (k). But then he went on to discuss that evidence. And I agree he did. I certainly can't say he didn't. But -- but the real issue here is what effect likely did that have on the jury, and I -- I'm indicating that -- that given the preliminary -- his preliminary part about it still doesn't apply but I will address it, that is unlikely to give the jury any confidence that that evidence could be considered. So it's not at all a concession that occurred in this case whatsoever.
 Well, why wouldn't the jury conclude -- why isn't it the most logical conclusion that, gee, the judge had us sit here through eight witnesses and listen to all that and he didn't exclude any part of it, so of course we must consider it because otherwise we wouldn't have been exposed to all of it?
 That was a relevant consideration in Boyde and I think a powerful consideration in Boyde and in California v. Brown. Because of the context of this case, it's not relevant here. Once the judge permits both counsel -- one counsel to argue one way and the other counsel to argue the other way, the jury is now being relegated as the -- the finder of the law. In order to evaluate whether or not they could consider that evidence, they had to look at the evidence that was presented.
 Well, they -- they always have to say whether or not we're going to really weigh this or is it just too tangential, and that's one way of saying, well, this really isn't mitigating. And we know as lawyers that it is mitigating in a sense that is -- that is relevant and that it's there for the jury to give it the weight that it chooses. But jurors say, well, you know, this -- this just is not important is what they're saying.
 Well, when the prosecutor says this doesn't fall under (k) and the defense attorney says it does fall under (k), all I'm indicating is that the argument that this would be viewed as a charade no longer has any effect. It is now a preliminary thing that the court -- that the jury must look to.
 Well, it's a shorthand for saying it doesn't fall under (k) because it just is of so little weight. Now, that's I think how the jury might have interpreted it.
 Yes, Your Honor, they might. But the issue here is whether or not there's a reasonable likelihood that the jury did not consider that, and -- and that's --
 Actually that isn't really the issue. I think -- I find that easy. The harder issue is -- is whether the -- a person who thought about it differently than me, a judge, would have -- be objectively unreasonable. At least for me, that's the hard question. The question you're arguing is not hard.
 Yes. I don't think I understand Your Honor.
 I mean, I would perhaps have come to a different conclusion than California Supreme Court on that question, but we can overturn them only if they're objectively unreasonable. And that's -- that's the hard thing because -- for me.
 Yes. I -- there is very -- relatively little guidance that we have so far on the AEDPA. I think the -- the cases that do have some relevance are both Wiggins v. Smith and Taylor v. Williams. Wiggins v. Smith dealt with the failure of the State court to actually evaluate evidence that occurred in this case. The California Supreme Court opinion on the issue of whether or not the -- the court properly conducted itself has one sentence, and the sentence says -- and I'm paraphrasing -- something to the effect of the fact that the court refused to adorn factor (k) is not in itself a -- an error. Well, we all, I think, would -- would concur that that's true, but that doesn't address what happened here. It's a complete failure to address an all-encompassing event that happened, something close -- and I have to be careful here -- something close to structural error where the judge gives over the obligation to decide what the law is to the jury. The California Supreme Court not once ever considered that, and there is no reference to them doing anything other than making that one --
 Well, no, but I mean, that's -- that's really wrong what the judge did. But -- but the -- that -- that's tangential to the question. The question is, is it reasonably likely, if that hadn't occurred, that the jury would have considered the evidence that he was converted? But since it did occur, you know, they -- they didn't consider it. Is it reasonably likely they never considered it? That's -- that's the question. And then I can imagine, for what reason that Justice Ginsburg said, myself sitting in the California Supreme Court and saying, well, they heard the evidence for 2 days or a day, six witnesses, eight witnesses. They're not technicians, the jury. And -- and of course, they considered it. I can imagine that and that's why I'm having -- even though I don't agree with it.
 Yes. Considered I agree. They certainly considered the evidence, but they also, if they were following their obligation under the law, they considered whether or not they were entitled to give that any weight under factor (k). That was the primary function that was given to them. So certainly they discussed the evidence, but then did they arrive -- did they go in that room and arrive at a decision that maybe we can't by law consider this evidence? And I think that's the focal point here and that's the thing this Court doesn't know what happened in that jury room.
 Except if they heard so much of the evidence, isn't it unlikely that the jury thought they couldn't consider what they heard?
 The more evidence they hear, the more likely it is I think that human beings are going to consider the evidence. The evidence -- the -- the penalty evidence took place over a 2-day period of time, but I want to indicate that it took place over two half-day periods of time, and that if you put the time together, I think it comes to around 70 pages, which should be substantially less than a half-day altogether. Now, it encompassed eight witnesses, and there was a lot of evidence brought out about post-crime conduct. But it -- it wasn't a massive amount such as there was in Boyde, 400 pages and weeks of testimony. So I think that that's a -- a -- an important consideration too. The -- the Court's concern about whether or not the jury would likely consider that, it seems to me, starts with the -- an examination of -- of factor (k) itself. And -- and I want to indicate that Mr. Payton really didn't start out at the same mark as -- as the State did in its case. The language of factor (k) just doesn't on its face appear to permit consideration of that evidence. And -- and so, therefore, something had to have happened in the trial, we assert, to change that, to make the ambiguous, at least as applied to Payton, evidence of factor (k) applicable so that the jury would reasonably likely consider it. The events that could have happened during the context of that trial didn't happen. In fact, everything happened against the defendant. He starts off with an instruction that's against him that supports, under any natural reading, the prosecutor's language, and then he's buttressed with a prosecutor that given the plain and natural meaning of the language, is going to have a far more compelling position with the jury about whether or not it could be considered. And the -- and the defense attorney's position is really nothing more than an assertion, when he looks at the language itself -- an assertion that it was awkwardly worded. Now -- now, the defense attorney made reference to if this was the kind of evidence -- if I was a juror and I was considering this, I would think this would be important evidence. And the answer to that is of course, it is important evidence, but that's not the question. The question is whether or not it could be considered under (k). He gives -- he, the defense attorney, gives his position that -- that (k) was meant to be a catchall factor and it was meant to consume and take into effect Payton's evidence, but he had nothing to support that. He had no legal position to support it. He was faced with the plain language of the statute that didn't permit him to do that.
 Doesn't it? I mean, it -- it says that -- what's -- what's the exact language of that statute? I just had it here. It's -- it's gravity. It's the --
 It is any other circumstance which extenuates the gravity of the crime.
 Of the crime. You could say it. Yes, his -- his later conversion extenuated the gravity of the crime, not the -- not the -- when I try to think of this person, who is not me, thinking of that, I say, well, plausible. Plausible, not perhaps the best, but plausible, isn't it?
 Well, as we pointed out in our brief, this Court in -- in Skipper -- some Justices in -- in that decision indicated that -- well, in fact, the majority indicated that the post-crime evidence of rehabilitation in prison is, in fact, not anything that relates to culpability. Factor (k), however way you look at it -- and I agree that it's sufficiently ambiguous to where, given the right context, the right events happening at trial, a jury would reasonably likely look at it as covering that. But not under this case, though, because there wasn't anything that happened in Payton's trial which permitted a reasonable inference that in fact that evidence should be considered. And as to harmless error, I -- as we pointed out in our brief, it -- under the California statute, which in effect requires that if the aggravating evidence outweighs the mitigating evidence, the jury shall return a verdict of death, if there's no reasonable likelihood that the jury considered factor (k), then in effect Bill Payton was left without any mitigating evidence to be considered by the jury at all. And that means that the jury had to come back with a verdict of death. Now, that brings this Court, once the Court -- if the Court becomes satisfied as to constitutional error, that brings the Court, I think, very closely to -- to this case -- this Court's case in Penry v. Johnson because there the jury will not have had a vehicle in order to give effect to Payton's mitigating evidence. In Penry v. Johnson, in fact, in discussing at least the Eighth Amendment issue, this Court never really even discussed harmless error. It was reversed without any discussion. Now, I don't want to suggest the Court didn't engage in a harmless error --
 I -- I see where you're going, and I -- I see that there's some parallel. The problem in Penry was that the jury -- the jurors had to actually violate their instructions, and you have to escalate your argument a bit before you get to that point.
 Yes, I -- I agree. It's not exactly identical, but we're very close to -- to that point in Penry. Beyond that, the prosecutor did argue vociferously that the jury should -- in its determination, should be concerned about whether or not Bill Payton is going to stab the prison guards in the back, in effect, argued dangerousness, which was appropriate. But if the jury -- he also argued that the jury couldn't consider evidence which plainly pointed to his lack of dangerousness, his good adjustment in prison, his conversion to Christianity. So, in effect, the prosecutor was able to argue its side and -- and the jury wasn't able, when you get to the harmless error analysis, to argue its side. And that's what makes this, it seems to me, a very strong showing that -- that harmless error -- that the error in this case is not harmless. It had a clearly important effect.
 Is it relevant at all? This happened 24 years ago. We're sitting here trying to think of what a jury would have been thinking in a state of the law that's a quarter of a century old and facts -- I don't know what to think. I guess that's just irrelevant?
 Well, it's certainly relevant to Bill Payton, and -- and I don't demean the position of the Court. It's not relevant in terms of its impact as to future cases. There are some cases left that are still dealing -- out there, dealing with factor (k). The best our knowledge, we've -- we've done a search and we believe there is about 70 cases dealing with the old, unadorned factor (k), but of those 70 cases, none of them from -- and we haven't reviewed all of them, but of the ones we've reviewed, none of them deal both with Payton's pure post-crime evidence, coupled with the prosecutor's unrelenting position to the Government that they cannot consider that evidence.
 So all this was at a time before Penry was decided.
 It is the time before Penry v. Johnson was decided.
 Yes.
 It is not the time before Penry v. Lynaugh was decided. And when I say --
 Which is the Texas -- the Texas -- you know, the ones --
 Both are the Texas case. Both deal with Mr. Penry.
 Yes, one and two.
 Yes.
 Is that --
 Yes. And when I say it was not before that, I'm talking about on the date of the California Supreme Court's decision. At the time of the jury determination, this Court only had -- or that court only had Lockett to make a determination as to whether the evidence could be -- could be considered. And the court made the decision that he thought the -- it could be considered, but then refused to make any adjustments once it became clear that both counsel were going to argue their respective positions on the law. The -- the Court earlier talked about other instructions as impacting upon the -- the context of the case, and those were important considerations in Boyde, especially the observation that the jury was to consider any other evidence presented at either time in the trial. But in the context of this case, Your Honor, it means nothing. As I've indicated, the jury was required to ignore any evidence it heard at either phase of the trial unless it fit within factors (a) through (k). If it didn't fit within there, even though they heard that evidence, they were instructed to ignore it. Beyond that, they were also instructed that the -- that they were to consider the arguments of counsel. Now, being that there was no clear instruction to the jury that they had to consider factor (k) as being relevant evidence, the jury then likely put greater weight on counsel's argument, and that's why it becomes important. So the other instructions, when you put them all together, rather than putting in proper context what did occur in this case, in effect make it even harder for Bill Payton's position that the jury should consider factor (k) to be relevant.
 The -- the prosecutor, at the very end of his closing to the jury, did seem, even if grudgingly with it, to recognize that -- that this evidence was mitigating. I'm looking at page 76 of the joint appendix at the top of the page. He makes the statement, the law is simple. It says aggravating factors outweigh mitigating, and then how do those factors line up? Well, the facts of the case showing the violence, et cetera -- that's on the aggravating side. And then against that, defendant really has nothing except newborn Christianity and the fact that he's 28 years old. So that -- in that final word to the jury, the prosecutor seems to be saying, yes, they have mitigating factors, but they're insubstantial, 28 years old and the claim that he's a newborn Christian.
 It'll be up to this Court to make a determination as to where the prosecutor was going and whether or not this constitutes a concession that -- that the jury could consider the evidence. I -- our position is that viewed as a whole, he did not go to that. Certainly he permitted the jury, and he did address the issue of if the jury does consider that. He premised it by saying, I don't think this is relevant, but if -- and I'm paraphrasing here. But if you think it's relevant, it's still not entitled to weight. If the issue before this Court is whether or not there's a reasonable likelihood that the jury considered that evidence, then given the context of that statement, I don't think the jury can hardly be satisfied that the prosecutor in fact gave in and agreed that Payton's evidence --
 Do -- do we have a transcript of that hearing here?
 Of what hearing, Your Honor?
 Well, the penalty phase. I mean --
 Yes.
 -- one way -- if I'm having trouble, I'll just read it.
 It is in the -- in the joint appendix, the entire --
 The whole thing.
 Yes, the entire penalty evidence and all argument and the instructions is in there. And that's -- unless the Court has any additional questions, I have nothing further. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Gits. Ms. Cortina, you have a little over 5 minutes left.
 Justice Stevens, the real inquiry is whether the California Supreme Court's decision was objectively unreasonable. It is not whether there was a reasonable likelihood. And Payton, like the Ninth Circuit -- Payton's counsel --
 Could you help me on that? I thought it was two steps. I thought the question is whether there's a reasonable likelihood that the jury was misled, and then you have to ask whether it was unreasonable for the State supreme court to conclude that there was that reasonable likelihood. Or correct me if I'm wrong.
 That is one way of approaching the case, but I think under AEDPA, what you'd look at, which would be the more appropriate way, is how the California Supreme Court analyzed the claim and not first conduct a de novo review about whether there was a reasonable likelihood. I don't think that in the end that there's much difference --
 But you can't overturn it on habeas unless there's a reasonable likelihood.
 Right. That would be -- right. You would have to find that the -- you would have to find an error and one that was objectively -- and then the California Supreme Court objectively unreasonable in not finding the error. This is true. So obviously the reasonable likelihood test is a -- is a relevant inquiry, but it is not the inquiry. And I think that -- that that's what Payton's argument demonstrates and the Ninth Circuit's analysis demonstrates, is that they are effectively equating a decision that the California Supreme Court's conclusion was incorrect with their personal -- in their subjective opinion with a -- with the standard that the decision must be objectively unreasonable. And in this case, the California Supreme Court's decision was manifesting not objectively unreasonable. We know -- we -- we know that objectively unreasonable doesn't have a clear definition. We do have an example of what is objectively unreasonable, and that was cited in Payton's brief and that is a failure to consider particular facts or relevant law. And we know that that didn't occur in this case. The very argument and facts that Payton insists were not considered by the California Supreme Court in applying Boyde -- if not in the majority opinion -- are found within Justice Kennard's dissent. So we have no question that the California Supreme Court identified the correct case and the correct principles within the case and considered all the necessary facts. And that should make this decision subject to deference under AEDPA. This Court last term provided additional guidance on how to assess the range of reasonable judgment through the lens of AEDPA in Yarborough v. Alvarado. And one of the things that the Ninth Circuit and Payton's analysis keeps overlooking is the -- Boyde's specific holding concerning factor (k). And when you analyze the -- the range of reasonable judgment of the California Supreme Court concerning factor (k), the specific rule of factor (k), the -- the range of reasonable judgment was less. The California Supreme Court had little to no leeway to conclude otherwise. Boyde's holding is broad. Boyde held that factor (k) was a broad, catchall mitigation instruction that allowed for any other circumstance that counseled a sentence less than death and specifically found that background and character fell within the ambit of factor (k). And no decision of this Court or the California Supreme Court in analyzing character has ever drawn a distinction between post-crime and pre-crime character evidence --
 There's a footnote in Boyde that seems to draw that distinction.
 The footnote in Boyde actually supports more California's position that factor (k) encompasses any other circumstance that would counsel a sentence less than death as opposed to the Ninth Circuit and Payton's interpretation that factor (k) is limited to the crime. In both the first part of footnote 5, the -- the -- Chief Justice Rehnquist rejects the dissent's argument that the gravity of the crime focused the consideration to the circumstances of the crime. Rather, it allowed the jury to assess the seriousness of what the defendant has done in light of what's the appropriate punishment, and that involves a consideration of the defendant's background and character. And then the last part of footnote 5 expressly recognizes that factor (k) allows for consideration of good character evidence, and good character evidence is only relevant to a decision about whether the person should live or die, not to circumstances related to the crime. And good character evidence under Payton and the Ninth Circuit's interpretation of factor (k) would not and could not, whether it existed pre or post-crime, fall under the meaning of factor (k). So the footnote 5 actually bolsters the ultimate broad interpretation that the California Supreme Court adopted when it applied Boyde -- Boyde's specific holding concerning factor (k) to the analysis of Payton's claim. And although they did, in footnote 5, distinguish the fact that it did not involve post-crime evidence in mitigation, it didn't decide the question. It was simply noting a fact that distinguished the case from Skipper. And -- and AEDPA requires that we follow the holdings of the Court and not dicta. So when we start --
 Thank you, Ms. -- go ahead and make one more sentence.
 The California Supreme Court's decision was a reasonable application of Boyde and the Ninth Circuit's reversal of it is -- and this Court should --
 I think we understand you.
 Exactly. Thank you. (Laughter.)
 Thank you. The case is submitted.
 We will now hear argument in Granholm against Heald and two related cases. Mr. Bolick.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: For 124 years, as state power over alcohol has ebbed and flowed, one principle has remained virtually constant, that states may regulate alcohol by one set of rules, not by two. New York and Michigan consigned out of-state wine, and only out-of-state wine, to the three tier system for closing the market to thousands of small family-run wineries and their customers for the benefit of a liquor distributor oligopoly. Discrimination is the core concern of the Commerce Clause, and it sends a powerful signal that the state is engaged, not in legitimate regulation, but in economic protectionism. The states and the liquor distributors make a sweeping argument that this Court has consistently rejected, that the Twenty-First Amendment creates plenary state authority.
 Well, under your view, could the three-tier system, itself, be challenged by a New Jersey wholesaler wanting to sell in New York, or a New York wholesaler wanting to sell in New Jersey?
 Yes, Justice Kennedy.
 So, under your view, the whole three-tier system has to go down?
 No, Justice Kennedy. So long as the state does not discriminate against out-of-state entities, it is free to, as this Court --
 Well, under my hypothetical. I don't know exactly how -- the way it works, you have to be a New York wholesaler to sell to a New York retailer. Under your view, a New Jersey wholesaler could sell to a New York retailer.
 That is -- or a challenge, as you ask the question, Justice Kennedy, could be mounted to that, under the same theory that we're advocating here. The state may have a different set of defenses that it doesn't have here. But --
 But so far as -- the rationale is the same.
 The --
 It seems to me that, under your rationale, that that in-state licensing system has to fall if there's a New Jersey wholesaler.
 It has to pass constitutional muster.
 And when you say there is no precedent -- I mean, I think a much more modest claim than you're making, the claim simply that a state cannot discriminate against out-of-state liquor -- i.e., the physical liquid -- which is really more modest and keeps the three-tier effect -- now, your -- that claim, that they couldn't do that, was really what was advanced in Young's Market. I read the briefs in that case. The briefs presented that Court -- you could have written those briefs. And the difficulty for you is, it articulated that more modest version very clearly, made a tremendously strong case, that was not forbidden by Section 2 of the Twenty-First Amendment. And this Court squarely rejected it.
 Your Honor, Young's Market -- the result in Young's Market was correct --
 The result, I understand, you could put on the basis of there being no discrimination.
 Exactly.
 Reading Justice Brandeis' opinion, I can't believe that that was the basis for his result.
 The -- the cases that followed Young's Market and purported to apply its reasoning took a very sweeping view of the Twenty-First Amendment. The Court began trenching on that very broad view immediately in 1939.
 But why wasn't that broad view appropriate, given the difference between the language of the Wilson Act, which has had the words "to the same extent and in the same manner," and the Webb Kenyon Act, which became the second section of the Twenty First Amendment, leaves out "to the same extent and the same manner." It just says that "alcoholic beverage so that the state can bar importation for delivery of, or use therein, in violation of laws thereof." It doesn't say "nondiscriminatory laws."
 Yes, Justice Ginsburg, the -- there was no need for the Webb-Kenyon Act to repeat the language of the Wilson Act. The Wilson Act dealt with the question of discrimination. The Webb-Kenyon Act dealt with questions that arose subsequent to the enactment of the Wilson Act. And as this Court has held in Craig versus --
 Well, maybe that's the Act, but when they put it in the Constitution, why didn't they adopt the language, "to the same extent and in the same manner"?
 I think the reason for that is because it was so obvious that the state could not, prior to prohibition, discriminate. It was not only embodied in the Wilson Act, but it was embodied in at least three cases of this Court.
 But it was not obvious to the person who at least drafted the Webb-Kenyon in the first instance, because as I -- as I understand it, there was an anti-discrimination provision, and that was then dropped. And do we know why it was dropped?
 It was dropped essentially because it was redundant.
 Well, but is that a -- is that on a legislative history record somewhere? Do we know that?
 No, Justice Souter, that is not expressly on the record. What is on the record, however, is that the Court was aiming -- or, excuse me, the Congress was aiming at specific Supreme Court decisions. There -- and it -- and the one case that was clearest on point on discrimination was Scott versus Donald, applying both the Commerce Clause and the Wilson Act to forbid discrimination. And there was -- there is nothing in the legislative history to indicate that Congress intended to overturn that decision. And as this Court has held in Craig versus Boren, and elsewhere, by enacting the Twenty First Amendment, Congress clearly intended to incorporate both the Wilson Act and the Webb-Kenyon Act and to restore to the states the police power that they had before prohibition. Emphatically, discrimination was not a part of that police power. It was a very accepted context. So, too, is it today. When the -- when the liquor distributors in the states asked this Court to overturn the Bacchus decision and to adopt a plenary view of the Twenty-First Amendment, it is not just asking you to overturn the Bacchus decision; it is asking you to overturn cases starting with the Midcal decision in 1980, the more recent Healy decision, and others, that have held that the core purposes of the Commerce Clause and the Twenty-First Amendment must be harmonized, that the Commerce Clause was never intended to be obliterated. And when you look at the core values of the two clauses, they do not clash. The core purpose of the Commerce Clause is nondiscrimination. The core purpose of the Twenty-First Amendment is temperance. And if you have a discriminatory statute, it sends a very strong signal that, in fact --
 Well, it's not only temperance, but it's control over revenues. Can you tell me, is the -- is there a New York State excise tax on alcohol?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 And is it collected by the wholesaler?
 Yes, it is.
 All right. What is it, ten dollars a gallon, or what?
 It's -- it turns out to --
 Is it on one --
 -- a few cents a bottle, yes.
 It is on one --
 It's on -- it's -- and all alcohol.
 Under our cases, can the California winery be required to remit the tax to the New York State revenue authorities?
 We believe so, Your Honor.
 Is that consistent with Quill?
 It is consistent with Quill. The way that the states -- there are 26 states that allow direct interstate shipment of wine, and the FTC has examined their record to see if they are doing okay. And one of the things that they do -- are able to do is tax collection. New Hampshire, Louisiana, and Nevada do collect taxes. The way they do it is by requiring a permit in order to ship wine into the state. That takes care of a number of problems, including all sorts of accountability concerns that the state may raise.
 What --
 Under --
 -- what do you make of the argument that there's no practical way, except at great expense, to audit compliance if they're out of state?
 Justice Souter, this is one of the most regulated industries in America, of course, and the model legislation that has been adopted by a number of states includes record-keeping provisions, it requires that wineries --
 Well, I will grant that's required, but the argument, as I understand it, is, to find out whether they're doing what they are required to do, you've got to drop in unexpectedly and make an audit. And that's one thing in the state; it's another thing across the country.
 No, it's important to recognize, Justice Souter, that under the three-tier system, which is -- which is where the states of New York and Michigan are saying that the other state wineries have to go -- the three-tier system does not do that. The states already rely on the Federal Government and the other states to police the wineries.
 So you're --
 Should they --
 -- saying they are not dropping in to local wineries to do audits, in fact?
 They may, in some instances. It is primarily a federal -- a federal activity.
 What do we have in the record on that?
 There is not -- there is not a great deal on the record, either way, on that, Your Honor.
 I don't know what you mean by "it's primarily a federal activity," that the Federal Government polices compliance with the state tax laws?
 That's correct, Your Honor. Under the --
 How does that occur?
 -- under the Federal Alcohol Administration Act, any violation of a state law is a federal offense and it is a violation -- so basically, whether it's under-age access, whether it's taxation, whatever --
 But does the federal authority make a routine audit to see that the state tax has been paid?
 Basically, every single time that there is a transaction, it is recorded by the U.S. Trade and Tax Bureau. And if it may please the Court, I'd like to reserve the rest of my time --
 Yes.
 -- for rebuttal.
 I have just one further question. Justice Kennedy asked you, "What about the wholesaler? What about the retailer?" What about alcoholic beverages other than wine?
 Justice Ginsburg, very important question. We are here today because a majority of states have chosen to regulate wine distinctively. And a handful of them, including Michigan and New York, have chosen to do so in a discriminatory manner. So long as states do not discriminate, in terms of direct shipping with regard to other alcohol -- and they don't; there's a flat prohibition across the United States, in terms of beer and other types of spirits -- we will not be here, because there would be no discrimination; there would be a single rule, and that rule would be, no one gets to do it.
 Thank you.
 Ms. Sullivan?
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Nothing in today's case, Justice Kennedy, requires you to take on the three-tier system, for the issue that is presented here is a very narrow one.
 Well, it's very narrow, but the rationale is sweeping, and that's why I asked. I just don't know if the in-state licensure system, which is the cornerstone of the three-tier distribution system, can survive under your rationale, assuming the hypothetical where a New Jersey wholesaler has all of the -- you know, the physical facilities and so forth that the New York wholesaler does.
 All that we ask in this case, Justice Kennedy, is that you strike down Michigan and New York's decision to apply the three-tier system to everyone except their own in-state --
 Well, I know, but what --
 -- producers of wine --
 -- but you're -- all you're asking is for a rationale that's sweeping.
 Justice Kennedy, in our case, we want to suggest that it is -- just as in Healy and Bacchus -- that a law that discriminates in favor of in-state producers and against out-of-state producers loses its immunity afforded by the Twenty-First Amendment. As Justice Scalia said in concurrence in Healy, a liquor law's discriminatory character eliminates the immunity afforded by the Twenty-First Amendment. It's really the state's position, aided by their wholesaler allies, that it is the sweeping one. Their position is that every state law that regulates the importation of liquor is, per se, valid if it has any conceivable rational connection to a state purpose. So, for example, if Michigan wanted to simply bar all California wines, facially exclude California wines, saying, "There are too many of them, it interferes with"
 Your answer to Justice Kennedy, I glean from what you said, that if New York took away the direct-sale privilege that in-state wineries get, then out-of-state wineries wouldn't be any better off, but they'd have nothing to complain about.
 That's exactly correct, Justice Ginsburg. As you've said in the context of gender discrimination, you can cure an equal-protection problem by leveling up or leveling down. In this case, we would suggest that the principle of free trade that was the reason, the principal reason, for the framing of the Constitution and has been reflected in over a century of dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence, suggests that you should -- the remedy should be to open the markets to out of-state producers --
 But that's a decision for the state to make. I mean, the -- what --
 Correct, Your Honor.
 Not for this Court.
 That's correct, Your Honor.
 You don't deny that a state -- that Michigan could bar all out-of-state wine -- not just -- not just California, but they could bar all out-of-state wines?
 That's correct, Justice Stevens, if it were in aid, and only if it were in aid, of the states -- and necessary to serve the state's internal purposes.
 The only reason being given to give a monopoly to local producers, that's their --
 That's --
 -- whole purpose. But could they do that?
 The state can have a monopoly if it's, itself, a market participant. What the state may --
 No, I'm saying just to look at the -- just limit to the market to -- the only market participants would be Michigan wine --
 Private --
 -- wineries.
 Justice Stevens, a state may not discriminate against out-of-staters for the sole purpose of economic protectionism.
 Well, I'm trying to think of what Brandeis could have been thinking.
 In Young's Market.
 Yes, that's right. And this is a reconstruction, because I have no doubt, and you have no doubt, that Section 2 was meant to end that part of the dormant Commerce Clause that would come under the name of original package doctrine --
 Correct.
 -- which meant that the foreign liquor has to be treated better than domestic liquor. Now, he's thinking, "Why is that? What is that package doctrine?" And the answer is, the dormant Commerce Clause -- it's part of the dormant Commerce Clause -- the dormant Commerce Clause is the implication from the existence of the commerce power in the Constitution. So if we have an amendment that says "that aspect of the dormant Commerce Clause doesn't apply," that means the dormant Commerce Clause doesn't apply, because you can't divide the dormant Commerce Clause into six different parts, or even two.
 But Justice --
 Now, maybe -- I think that's how he's reasoning.
 But --
 And if he is, and even if he isn't, why isn't that right?
 Justice Breyer, the Young's Market language permitting state discrimination is, indeed, broad, but it's been superceded by 40 years of this Court's jurisprudence harmonizing the Twenty-First Amendment with the rest of the Constitution. Remember, Justice Brandeis, in Young's Market, didn't even think the Equal Protection Clause applied to liquor imports, a position that's inconsistent with Craig against Boren. And nobody would suggest today that equal protection permits a state to import only from male-owned wineries or only import wine from white-owned wineries. So there -- the 40 years of jurisprudence --
 But Craig against Boren was --
 -- has been --
 -- had nothing to do with the Commerce Clause.
 Correct, Your Honor, but if -- if there were a law -- the states are claiming that any law governing --
 Nothing to do with importation, either.
 But the dormant Commerce Clause reflects a fundamental structural principle that is every bit as much a part of the Constitution as the Equal Protection Clause upheld in Craig v. Boren. Indeed this Court, in cases from McCulloch to the Eleventh Amendment cases and state sovereignty cases, has recognized that a principle of the Constitution is no less fundamental because it is a structural implication of the text. So the dormant Commerce Clause stands on the same footing as the affirmative power of Congress and on -- it's the same footing as the Equal Protection Clause at issue --
 Do you think Congress --
 -- in Craig v. Boren --
 -- could enact a statute authorizing the states to do just what they've done here?
 Absolutely, but it has not. And the Wilson Act -- to go back to Justice Souter's question and Justice Ginsburg's question -- Congress could authorize it as it has done, for example, in the McCarran Ferguson Act, allowing the states to discriminate against out-of-state industry with respect to the industry of insurance. It has not done so here. Webb-Kenyon did not authorize discrimination, and the Wilson Act forbade discrimination for just -- reasons Justice Ginsburg described. It said you may regulate imports of liquor in the same manner as local liquor laws. And, of course, the purpose of Section 2 was to allow to the dry states to keep dry by preventing all those original packages from piling up in the railway stations and being open to bootleggers throughout the state, undermining the dry policies of the state. Wilson forbade discrimination. Web Kenyan didn't authorize it. And in Congress' most recent articulation of its view of the harmony between the Twenty-First Amendment and the rest of the Constitution, the Twenty-First Amendment Enforcement Act, passed in 2000, enacted in 2000, Congress has a rules-of-construction section that says, "We view any state plea to the federal courts to enforce their laws as reflecting the jurisprudence of this court." And, in fact, floor debate on that rules-of-construction section reflected allusions to Bacchus, Healy, and the other cases that said dormant commerce -- the negative implications of the Commerce Clause, no less than the Equal Protection Clause or the Due Process Clause or the Establishment Clause, constrain the states in their regulation of importation of liquor. So with all respect to Justice Brandeis, Justice Breyer, the Young's Market statements about discrimination have been superceded. What New York and Michigan have done here is say that one set of exceptions apply only to in-state producers, just as Connecticut, in Healy, said, "If you just sell beer within our state, you don't have to face price ceilings that you have to face if you do business over in Massachusetts or Rhode Island." Just as in Bacchus, the -- you struck down a decision -- an excise tax exemption that said, "If you're an importer of liquor, you have to pay an excise tax, but if you're a local producer of locally produced wine and spirits, you get out of that restriction."
 Okay, we've got one difference from Bacchus, because the claim that's being made here, which I gather was not made, or made seriously, in Bacchus, is there really is a need for differential treatment for purposes of enforcement. Go back to the enforcement of the tax law.
 Justice --
 How are we supposed -- what standard are we supposed to use to judge that argument? And, by that standard, how good is the argument?
 Justice Souter, we believe the standard should be strict scrutiny, though there must be a necessity to serve --
 Because --
 -- a legitimate --
 -- it's facial discrimination.
 Because it's facial discrimination. It's absolutely undisputed. Michigan -- in fact, Michigan state concedes that they have flatly banned out-of-state wineries from shipping directly to consumers. There's no question that this is facially discriminatory. But even if the standard were a more deferential one in which all the state needed to show was a reasonable need for discrimination, it can't come close to doing that here. Neither Michigan nor New York has shown that the facial discrimination here is necessary to protect minors or to protect the collection of taxes. Let's start with minors. The Michigan claim that it's protecting against under-18 sales is belied by the fact that Michigan is allowing 40 Michigan wineries and, at last count, 7500 Michigan retailers to deliver directly to consumers. The way to protect my -- so just as in Craig v. Boren, the exception for young women to drink 3.2 beer, as opposed to young men, belied the state's interest in temperance. So the pattern of exceptions here that Michigan has created belies any notion that it's protecting under-18-year-olds from drinking. And, of course --
 But what about audits for revenue --
 On revenue, the nondiscriminatory means that's available to the state that Michigan and New York have not shown any reason to reject -- 26 states have adopted some version of this -- is to require an out-of-state winery to get a permit. And that's a -- Justice Breyer, one thing that's still left of Brandeis. You can require a permit from an out-of-state winery, which would be unusual to acquire from widgets or milk. But you can require a permit, and, as a condition of the permit, Justice Souter. The out-of-state winery has to agree to submit to the state's jurisdiction, to submit to the state's tax jurisdiction. And, Justice Kennedy, whether or not Quill would permit taxation if you were simply sending by common carrier, our clients want to -- want to pay taxes, want to sign up for permits, want to play on a --
 Well --
 -- level playing field --
 -- well, they do today, I'm sure, but -- [Laughter.]
 But, Justice Souter, to -- look at the experience --
 They -- you say they don't want to go to California to do an audit.
 They certainly don't, Justice Souter, but New Hampshire is a state that has actually -- your own state is a state that has on its Web site a set of out-of-state wineries. It requires that they keep and supply sales records on a monthly basis, that they keep those records for three years --
 Maybe we're getting ripped off.
 I -- [Laughter.]
 -- think New Hampshire's done very well collecting taxes from out-of-state producers, Justice Souter. It's a leader --
 Ms. Sullivan --
 -- in the field.
 -- may I -- may I -- I just want to clarify one point. It was just -- the question Justice Stevens asked. It's your position that if Michigan allows Michigan wines to be sold and possessed and consumed, that it must also allow out-of-state wine to be sold, possessed, and consumed. Would --
 That's correct.
 That is your --
 That's correct, Justice Kennedy. But to go back to the physical-presence question, Justice Souter, Michigan is not now -- Michigan officials are not now traipsing up to the upper peninsula and all around the state to inspect wineries. The record is clear on that. What Michigan does is require that wineries in Michigan send samples and records to their offices. And the Internet actually, if anything -- the states say that the Internet increases the danger, but the Internet also increases, in parallel, the power of the states to police out-of-state wineries without an in-state presence. Just as, Justice Stevens, the Internet may make every speaker with a PC a town crier, as you said --
 Could --
 -- in Reno versus ACLU --
 -- could a state --
 -- so it makes every interstate --
 -- could a state require an out-of-state winery to keep its books online, subject to a password, so that, with a password, they could go in and audit the books across the country, by wire?
 Yes, Justice Souter, if it were part of a -- an agreement to a permit that the -- that the out-of-state winery is willing to make, then there's no extraterritorial regulation there, that would be just fine. So, yes, the state can, through Internet, so to speak, -- Internet monitoring, through virtual monitoring -- do all the work it needs to do to make sure that the out-of-state winery is paying taxes. And, by the way, Michigan does not collect taxes, Justice Kennedy, through the distributors. Michigan collects taxes from the wineries, whether they're in-state or whether they're out-of-state wine shippers. So Michigan can give no justification for why out-of-state wineries have to go through the distributors for tax purposes. They're not using the distributors as their tax-collection agents now.
 Commerce Clause, in effect, protects consumers in states from entrenched business interests that want to have protectionism, and you're -- you object to that and invoke the Commerce Clause to do it. Under that rationale, aren't all the California reciprocity laws invalid, as well?
 Justice Kennedy, reciprocity laws -- yet -- possibly. They may be a necessary requirement now that so many states are closed to states. They may be a necessary mechanism for some states trying to get wines to market in the way that the framers envisaged. It may be a necessary, for now, to get into closed states. In a world that we hope that you create, in which discrimination is not allowed, they would be completely unnecessary and possibly unconstitutional. But to return to the key point here, Michigan and New York may not facially discriminate in favor of their own producers unless they can show that reasonable nondiscriminatory alternatives are unavailable. And here, Justice Souter, on any standard of heightened scrutiny, they have not come close to making that kind of showing, because there are all these other means -- means that have been recognized by the 26 states that don't discriminate, means that have been proven in states from New Hampshire to Virginia, means that are not based on facial discrimination. It's the discrimination that has to be shown to --
 Let me just --
 -- be necessary here.
 -- be sure I heard your answer to Justice Kennedy correctly. You'd concede that the reciprocity laws are all unconstitutional?
 Not -- they are subject to heightened scrutiny because they discriminate against out of-staters in a way that you could not -- for example, in New Energy, you said that you can't have a preference for -- you can't have a discrimination in Ohio in reciprocity for Indiana. Reciprocity laws normally do violate the principle of dormant Commerce Clause invalidation.
 And you contend that they do -- the liquor reciprocity laws, all of them are unconstitutional.
 Not -- we contend that they would be subject to strict scrutiny, and they could be upheld if the state could show that they are closely tailored in a --
 They can -- that they can be --
 -- way that these laws are not.
 -- upheld by making a showing that you say is virtually impossible to make.
 Your Honor, that's not before, and if there were other reasons --
 No, but I think it is --
 -- the state could -- [Laughter.]
 -- it is an interesting question as to whether that's a -- that's a -- you know, that's a necessary consequence of this decision, in your view. you to reach the question of whether there are other state defenses in other cases. The justifications the states have given here are so terribly weak in relation to their discriminatory laws that you should strike down these laws, you should invalidate them, you should affirm the judgement of the Sixth Circuit and reverse the judgements of the Second Circuit. Thank you very much.
 Thank you, Ms. Sullivan. Mr. Casey.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: For more than 70 years, the Twenty-First Amendment has permitted states to restrict the importation and delivery of alcohol by out-of-state vendors. There are substantial differences between licensed in-state vendors of alcohol and out-of-state vendors that are not subject to the full extent of state regulatory and taxing powers. Because of those differences, Michigan requires that sales, including direct shipment of alcohol, be performed only by licensed, strictly regulated, in-state vendors. This importation regulation is a power expressly conferred by the text of the Twenty-First Amendment. It's consistent with the entire history of alcohol regulation in this country, and it's consistent with this Court's jurisprudence interpreting the Twenty-First Amendment --
 Now the Bacchus case cuts against you, to some extent.
 The Bacchus case was a very unique situation that we believe is not in any way controlling in the present case. It was not an importation case; it was an exemption from a state excise tax on wholesalers for alcohol that was already within the state's stream of commerce.
 Well, but I think what's fairly implied in Justice O'Connor's question, you have to look at the language of Bacchus, and the language of Bacchus, in effect, restored the anti-discrimination component of the Commerce Clause to liquor control. I think that's a fair and necessary reading of the case. Now --
 I disagree that that is a necessary reading --
 And I know it --
 -- of the case.
 -- involved pineapple wine and all that. I know that, but -- [Laughter.]
 -- what we're talking about is the language of the Court in that case.
 Correct, but you're -- you have to understand that language in light of the actual context. There, the state did not even assert a Twenty-First Amendment defense.
 Well, then you have to understand Young in the light of its context, where there was no discrimination --
 There was discrimination in Young, Your Honor, and I'd like to get to that. But to focus on Bacchus for a moment, the state never asserted the Twenty First amendment, and it was undisputed --
 No, but the question was before the Court, because the dissent certainly raised the question.
 Correct. And we have suggested, in our brief, that the Bacchus case is distinguishable and not controlling here. We have also suggested that Bacchus was incorrectly decided. We can prevail in this case without overruling Bacchus, but we have suggested that --
 Well, why don't you focus on that? Because it's a little hard to plan on overruling that case. [Laughter.]
 Well --
 So why don't you at least address how you would distinguish Bacchus? Because there is a lot of language in there that cuts against your position.
 The only justification for the statute in Bacchus was what the Court characterized as "mere protectionism." That's not the situation with the Michigan statute. Again, the Michigan statute involves the paradigm -- or the quintessential Twenty-First Amendment power of regulating importation; it's not an -- attacks on alcohol that's already an exemption from a tax for two particular products.
 Well, no -- I mean, that --
 Do you --
 -- that rather lengthy statement you made earlier, that the Bacchus case didn't involve the importation of alcohol. But it did. I mean, the only reason that the in-state exemption was held to be unconstitutional was because you were treating out-of-state sellers differently. How can you possibly say that --
 It was treating --
 -- the case didn't involve it?
 -- it was treating two particular items of in-state production differently than all other in-state items and out-of-state items; but it was a taxation issue, not an importation issue. And as the Court said in Bacchus and in Capital Cities, the correct analysis in the -- in evaluating this kind of case is to determine, first, whether the activity of the regulation at issue is an exercise of a power conferred by the Twenty-First Amendment --
 Well, why don't we focus on the Court's rationale, which was stated very concisely by Justice White. He said, "Hawaii's discriminatory tax cannot stand." And then he said, "Whatever you can say about the Twenty-First Amendment, one thing is certain, the central purpose was not to empower the states to favor local liquor industries by erecting barriers to competition." That was this Court's explanation for ruling the way it did, even though there was this infant industry of pineapple whatever.
 That was the first stage of the Court's analysis. The Court went on to say it was not supported by any clear concern of the Twenty-First Amendment in combating the evils of an unrestricted traffic in liquor --
 Well, your opponents have said that there isn't any clear countervailing interest here. They're saying you can't claim you're protecting kids, because you're selling to the kids at home; there's no serious audit-collection problem; and the other regulatory interests -- they didn't say this, but are, sort of, gauzy the way they're stated. I mean, they're saying that, by a process of elimination, what you get down to is nothing but discrimination and protectionism. What is -- what is your answer to that? Where is --
 We --
 -- the substantial interest?
 -- we disagree wholeheartedly with that. The Michigan --
 I know, but --
 -- the Michigan regulations do promote the state's interest in temperance. They do give the state a better --
 Well, you -- I mean, you say that, but how? The very activity that you don't want them to engage in, you're engaging in, or your local wineries are engaging in, for example.
 But the key is, with an in-state licensee, the state has the ability to enforce against that licensee, to inspect, to punish the licensee --
 Do we --
 -- to hold them accountable.
 -- do we have a record of what the state is doing with respect to its in-state licensees, indicating what it could not do effectively to out-of- staters? What do we have in the record?
 The record in this case consisted of a small number of affidavits, answers to interrogatories, some surveys that were submitted as exhibits to motions for summary judgement. Both sides submitted that type of evidence. The District Court decided this was a question of law, and specifically said that he did not consider any of the factual evidence. So the record --
 Well, should --
 -- was not fully developed.
 -- should we send it back for -- if we disagree with the rationale, should one or the other of these cases go back for evidence on what, in fact, the state is doing in relation to its in-state licensees and evidence that it could not effectively do the same with respect to out-of-staters?
 Yes, if --
 And what would you show? What do you, in effect -- make an offer of proof.
 We would show that the Michigan requirement limiting sales and direct shipping to in-state licensees is required because the state only has effective enforcement authority over in-state licensees. But --
 Well, but wait a minute. You -- it was suggested that the state could require a license of an out-of-state supplier, and that that license could be conditioned upon submission to Michigan's jurisdiction in all respects. Is that not feasible?
 Michigan does have a current license for out-state seller of wine. You know, these players --
 But could you not require submission to --
 We --
 -- Michigan's jurisdiction for all purposes of enforcement?
 Certainly, we could pass a law to that effect. The problem is --
 And if you -- if you did that, could you require, as I suggested of Counsel on the other side, that you -- that, as a condition of the licensing, that the business records of these companies be placed in some secure online fashion, that, with a password, you could get into and do an audit across the continent just as readily as you could do an audit next door? Could Michigan not do that?
 But there is no guarantee that such an audit would be just the same as an audit of an in-state --
 Well, let me ask, once we accept the proposition -- I think this is the necessary reading of Bacchus -- that the Commerce Clause applies to liquor and prevents discrimination, it seems to me it's just like any other commodity -- food, milk, et cetera -- and, in this case, you have a very substantial burden to show that this discriminatory treatment is justified -- maybe strict scrutiny, maybe heightened scrutiny. And this trial has occurred. You have had that opportunity. I don't see why you have a right to go back.
 Despite the lack of evidence in the record and the fact that District Court did not consider that evidence, the Sixth Circuit dismissed all of those claims of the state and remanded for entry of judgement on the Plaintiffs without giving us an opportunity to develop that record. I also want to say --
 See, I don't -- I don't understand. Didn't you have an opportunity to develop the record? I mean, this was --
 There was --
 -- a discriminatory matter. It was your burden to show that whatever discrimination existed -- assuming that we find the law the way Bacchus seemed to say it is -- it was your burden to show that there was some justification for that discrimination.
 There --
 You had your chance to show it.
 -- there was evidence in the record. There were affidavits from Michigan enforcement officials about stings, about problem with enforcing --
 All right, well --
 -- against Internet --
 -- tell us what those -- what that material is, and if we find that material sustains your burden, that's fine, you win; and if it doesn't, you lose. I don't know why we have to let you go back and -- [Laughter.]
 -- and retry the case.
 Our key position is that before you get to that kind of evidentiary burden, the legal question --
 That's what I'm interested in. You win, either way. If it -- maybe if the Commerce Clause -- dormant Commerce Clause discrimination principle applies, you win, if we scrutinize strictly and say you have a good justification. Whether you do or not, I guess I'll find out from reading the record, but I'm more interested in the first half, which is -- doesn't apply at all. Now, your opponent said, in response to my pointing to Brandeis on this, that to support you, as to precedent, Bacchus. Young's Market isn't any good anymore. As to concept, you can divide the dormant Commerce Clause into a -- you have to favor out-of-state principle, which was the original package doctrine, which has long since disappeared, and the anti-discrimination principle, which hasn't disappeared. And her third part, implicit, is, historically, this whole Section 2 was aimed at the original package part; there is not a word in any brief I saw that suggests any motive in Section 2 to get rid of the anti-discrimination principle. I haven't found a word in support on your side on that. So she says, "Put those three things together, and we win." That's her point. Now, what's your response?
 We disagree with that entire position. The text --
 I know you do. [Laughter.]
 -- the text of the Twenty-First Amendment -- the text of the Twenty-First Amendment gives states the right to control imports. The history of the Twenty-First Amendment in the Webb-Kenyon Act clearly demonstrate -- the purpose of the Webb-Kenyon Act was to eliminate alcohol shipments from --
 Do you think --
 -- the Commerce Clause.
 -- that Michigan can prohibit the importation of any wine, but still allow its own wine to be produced, sold, and consumed?
 Yes. That's precisely what situation was with --
 I know you do, but the principle of Webb-Kenyon, which was enacted when the Wilson Act was already there -- very clear -- is to stop the original package doctrine, stop favoritism of the out of-state liquor shipment, which meant, in a dry state, you had to sell less. I mean, that's what it's there for. I didn't find a word, in other words, contrary to what I've just said; and if there are such words, now is the time to point them to me -- to point them out.
 The title of the Webb-Kenyon Act is, "It is in -- an act divesting intoxicating liquors of their interstate character in certain cases. The clear intent of the Webb-Kenyon Act was to remove alcohol from the Commerce Clause. The Constitution -- the Twenty-First Amendment constitutionalized that Commerce Clause framework." That's what this Court said in Craig v. Boren. Craig v. Boren also said, "The Twenty-First Amendment creates an exception to the operation of -- the normal operation of the dormant Commerce Clause."
 Well, then you are asking us, I guess, not only to reject Bacchus, but who was the first one that said that the Commerce Clause remains alive and well? Was it Justice Stewart? And I forgot which case it was. It was --
 That may be. The Commerce Clause remains alive and well, but the Commerce Clause --
 In the context of alcoholic beverages.
 In the context of powers expressly conferred upon the states by the Twenty-First Amendment, that's an exception to the operation -- the normal operation of the dormant Commerce Clause. Commerce Clause has to be read in light of the Twenty-First Amendment, just as the Twenty-First Amendment has to be read in light of the Commerce Clause and other provisions of the Constitution.
 But that's a different argument than the one you made before, which seems to be saying the Twenty-First Amendment trumps, not that the two have to be harmonized.
 When you read the two in light of each other, the purposes of each, it is clear that the purpose of the Twenty-First Amendment was to remove alcohol from interstate commerce as a constitutional matter, to prevent Congress from tampering with it in the future, to give the judgement to the states as to --
 Well, you --
 -- the necessity for --
 -- you say further than that; you say the purpose was to allow that the states discriminate in favor of home industry, if it chooses.
 That is one of the purposes, yes. In that -- in the case that was decided immediately after the Young's Market, Mahoney, and Indianapolis Brewing, the Court said, "Discrimination is permissible in this narrow context, where the state is acting pursuant to its Twenty First Amendment powers and regulating importation of alcohol."
 But that gets us back to Bacchus and what to make of that.
 I -- as I indicated, I don't believe Bacchus overrules those cases; it didn't even cite most of those cases. But --
 Well, the dissent seemed to think so -- [Laughter.]
 -- didn't it?
 That's correct. But, as I said, we believe Bacchus is distinguishable, because that was mere protectionism, the state does have other justifications here --
 Well, we've also said that mere protectionism is permitted.
 Mere protectionism is permitted. In this case, if we have to present other justifications, we have, and there are other justifications, unlike the situation in Bacchus. So even if the Bacchus rationale is good law, we still prevail on that. Thank you, Your Honor.
 Ms. Halligan?
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: In answer to your question first, Justice Breyer, the Twenty-First Amendment does not propose a nondiscriminatory ban. The Court rejected that position, not just in Young's Market and Mahoney in Indianapolis, but also in Clark Distilling, the case in which the Court upheld the constitutionality of the Webb-Kenyon Act, itself. It held that the Webb-Kenyon Act operated to remove any immunity that had been conferred by the dormant Commerce Clause. Bacchus is not to the contrary. In North Dakota, which follows Bacchus, the Court relied again on Young's Market to say that the states could impose different rules on out-of-state vendors where they were necessary to protect the integrity --
 Do you -- do you take the position that your colleague on your same side takes, that a state can permit only the sale, consumption, and -- of its own wines, and bar all out-of-state wines?
 The express terms of the Twenty First Amendment would allow that if -- particularly if it were necessary to advance the concerns of the Twenty-First Amendment. For example --
 No, no, don't --
 No --
 -- don't put in the qualifications.
 -- just for local protectionism.
 Simply for mere protectionism?
 It's just for local protectionism. We want to promote our wines, and not anybody else's.
 The terms of the amendment would allow that, but I don't think the Court needs to explore the outer parameters of the Twenty-First --
 Well, I'm trying to understand what your --
 -- the Twenty-First --
 -- what your theory is. And so you are in agreement with your colleague that this could be done, if New York chose. You can only drink New York-grown wines in -- sell and consume -- in the state of New York.
 It could be done, but that question really isn't presented here, because --
 But could Congress pass a law forbidding it?
 That's a difficult question, because --
 Yeah. All right. But I need an answer to it. [Laughter.]
 Because, you see, what's going to come next is, if you say yes, I'm going to say, "Well, didn't it pass that law with the Wilson Act?"
 Let me answer both of those questions, if I can, Your Honor. Certainly, this Court has held, repeatedly, that the Twenty-First Amendment did not, in any substantial way, completely repeal Congress' affirmative power under the Commerce Clause. It said that in Midcal and Capital Cities. But we would argue that if Congress acted in a way which completely removed state authority to determine whether or not alcohol could be sold and the terms under which it could be sold -- for example, if Congress said all states must be dry -- then we would argue that the Twenty-First Amendment wouldn't allow that, because that would completely eviscerate any state authority.
 How can that be? I mean, if this is a constitutional elimination of the Commerce Clause, how can Congress bring it back in simply by enacting a statute?
 The legislative history makes clear that the Twenty-First Amendment was intended to eliminate the impediments posed by the dormant Commerce Clause and authorize states to regulate it.
 But you -- you want us to read it by its terms. It doesn't say anything about the dormant Commerce Clause. If we read it absolutely the way one of your arguments wants us to do, surely it excludes Congress.
 By terms of our --
 So you don't want us to read it absolutely.
 Your Honor, I don't think that -- again, I don't think that you need to decide those questions in this case. This case goes to what's at the very core of the Twenty-First Amendment, whether states can decide who can sell liquor to their citizens and whether or not states --
 But it also goes to the very core of the Commerce Clause. And there are really two classifications of dormant Commerce Clause cases. One is -- and I think it's an improper use of the term "dormant clause" -- is where there's discrimination. Only the Congress can allow discrimination against out-of-state products. That's one whole classification. And that's what's -- and that's what's involved here.
 North Dakota indicates otherwise, I believe, Your Honor. In North Dakota, this Court said that, because, when alcohol flows across the border, it poses unique risks to the regulatory regime, because the state can't bring the alcohol within the full extent of its regulatory and supervisory powers, that it may be appropriate and necessary for states to impose unique rules on out-of-state vendors. In North Dakota, the Court did not say --
 Well, but that's fine. And the other side isn't denying that here, that if, you know, they're -- discrimination means treating out-of-state people differently without good reason.
 But there is good reason --
 Now, if you're willing to -- okay, if you're willing to acknowledge that, then we're halfway there and we're just arguing about whether there is good reason here or not.
 There is good reason here, Your Honor. What's critical about New York's law, as well as Michigan's law, is that it requires that any alcohol vendor have a physical presence in the state. And that's important for a couple of reasons. The state can't meaningfully oversee traffic in alcohol with an out-of-state entity. Petitioner suggested --
 What is it doing with the in state entities? I mean, one of the claims is that nobody is posting officers outside the in-state wineries, no one's making substantial physical audits of in-state wineries. Is that wrong?
 It is wrong, Your Honor. It's certainly not the case that we have an SLA inspector outside every entity that sells liquor. That would not be possible. But it is true that the state liquor authority can, and does, physically inspect the premises. They do so to determine whether --
 What do they inspect them for? Their books, I suppose.
 Well, more than that, and this is why the physical presence is important and why the Internet hypothetical that Your Honor raised would not -- would not satisfy the state's concerns. What the state can do is, it can go onto a premises, and it can count whether the bottles on the shelves of that premises match the records. That's the best way to detect whether or not there is evasion. Because if you have --
 And is there a record that the state is doing that?
 There is not clear evidence in the record with respect to that -- to that level of detail, but that --
 Well, isn't that the end of that issue, then? I mean, it is your burden, isn't it?
 Your Honor, there is material in the McKeon affidavit, which is in the Joint Appendix -- Mr. McKeon is the Chair of the state liquor authority -- but it's also the case that to suggest that because there is some option out there -- and there's no firm evidence that a less prescriptive rule would, in fact, satisfy the state's concerns in preventing diversion and tax evasion -- but the possibility that's there's some rule out there, because other states have adopted more lax rules, is to treat alcohol like any other product. And the Twenty First Amendment reflects a consensus by this nation that alcohol is unique, that it should not be open to --
 Well, the Twenty-First Amendment at least recognizes that alcohol can be treated as unique, and the issue here is whether you're really doing that in a way that supports your claim of interest.
 Yes --
 And, so far, the one specific thing I've heard from you is that state inspectors do go on winery premises, and they count bottles, and they see if they match what's on the written record.
 They also draw on the assistance of local law enforcement. And this is also --
 But if that's --
 -- set forth --
 -- if that's really what New York's concern is, then why does New York say, "Ah, but out-of-staters, if only you establish an office here -- not a winery; an office -- you can operate, and you can make the direct sales from that office, and even in" -- I think your brief told us that, well, these small wineries, out-of-state wineries, haven't got all that much to worry about, because, after all, they could join together -- a group of them could open an office. Now, that office, owned by a group of out-of-state vintners is not going to have bottles on the shelf, is it?
 Yes, Your Honor, it would. That's -- the state laws requires that any licensed winery have a government-bonded storehouse or ware-room -- storehouse -- storeroom or warehouse, pardon me --
 Well, isn't the --
 The reason for that is because physical products --
 How do you envision this combination of small wineries? You said that in-state establishments might be jointly maintained by out-of-state wineries.
 Yes, Your Honor. The state liquor authority has not issued any regulations on this, but presumably what they would say is, you could share a space, provided that the physical property of each winery, the bottles, is segregated so that the states can come in and check whether or not each winery's products conform with their records. There are other reasons why a physical presence is important, as well. First of all, the state draws on local law enforcement extensively to identify illegal activities, and that would not be possible with any entity located out-of-state. Additionally --
 What illegal -- I'm sorry -- you've got to be specific. What illegal activities? Selling to minors?
 It could be selling to minors, but it could also simply be sale out of an unlicensed premises, where you are selling outside the proper hours of sale, or sale outside of the three-tier system --
 Yeah, but if licensed premises don't serve a state interest, then you can't require a licensed premises, so that argument doesn't get too far.
 But, Your Honor, the principle that having entities that sell liquor be licensed, is one that is at the heart, not just at the --
 How does -- how does requiring them to have an in-state office somehow prevent them from shipping to minors from out of state --
 It --
 -- or from shipping to consumers from out of state without paying you their tax?
 It --
 How does the opening of an --
 Right.
 -- an office in New York State at all prevent that?
 It can't prevent it a hundred percent, but no --
 It can't prevent it at all.
 Your Honor, it can deter it, and it can deter it significantly, because, first of all, there is a much more significant opportunity to identify the illegal activities; and, secondly, if a retailer or a wholesaler or a manufacturer knows that, that operates as a powerful deterrent --
 What did --
 We seem to be talking -- may I just ask one -- we seem to be talking about two different things. Justice Scalia was assuming that, if you have the license and some in-state warehouse, you can ship from outside. And I -- is that the assumption? Or is your argument that New York can require -- does require the in state warehouse, and you can ship into -- in New York, you can ship only from that warehouse?
 To be clear, the state has not issued regulations that specifically address that point, because --
 So the -- we don't know yet.
 We don't know. But in talking with the state liquor authority, they have made it clear that their intent would be to require that the liquor come first to the in-state premises --
 Well, even if -- I'm willing to assume that. How does that guarantee that the out-of-state winery will not, in violation of New York State law, ship directly to minors or ship directly to consumers, just simply bypassing its cache of wine in New York?
 There is no guarantee, Your Honor, but there is never any guarantee --
 There's no guarantee.
 -- that people won't --
 It doesn't -- it doesn't enable you to enforce your law any more rigorously than without having a requirement for a local office.
 That, I would respectfully disagree with. It does operate as a powerful deterrent and --
 Well, your argument there is that --
 -- as an investigative aid.
 -- if they break the law, you can shut down the warehouse; whereas, you can't effectively do that if the warehouse is in California. Isn't that your point?
 That's one of the points, but also that we're much more likely to be able to identify the illegal activities in the first place. The suggestion that we would send inspectors to California or any other place to look at books and count bottles is completely infeasible. And the Twenty-First Amendment was intended to allow states to deal with the regulatory challenges that are posed when liquor comes across the border. If we had to demonstrate that there was a hundred-percent compliance, then we couldn't have any regulation at all. That's not, I would submit, a --
 Well, to what --
 -- reasonable measure.
 -- to what extent does New York take account of, say, the rigorous regulation in the states from which this wine is coming? You say we must do this to police for all kinds of things. But don't other states -- California, Virginia -- don't they have laws that their local wineries must meet?
 They --
 And is New York just saying, "We're going to treat this thing as though it's totally unregulated, anyway"?
 We're not suggesting that, Your Honor. What we are suggesting is that relying on other states to enforce law violations in New York State is not a very feasible alternative. Additionally, there are 33 states that have agreed with New York, a number of whom are states that have either reciprocal or unrestricted shipping statutes, and said to this Court, "Please do not prohibit the kinds of laws that are at issue in New York and Michigan." So it's obviously important to the regulators in those states, as well.
 What about the states that do a allow shipment from out of state? They don't care about their --
 I can't --
 How many are there that allow shipment from out-of-state wineries?
 I believe that the current number is 26 states. I certainly can't speak to the regulatory motivations of each of those states, or the reasons why those laws might have been passed.
 It certainly suggests that what -- that what you're arguing is not essential to the state's enforcement of its alcohol laws.
 Well, a number of those states have, in fact, joined New York and Michigan in asking the Court not to --
 States don't like federal regulation --
 -- restrict that.
 -- of any sort, of course. I know that. [Laughter.]
 Your Honor, I think that all the Twenty-First Amendment requires the states to demonstrate is that the regulatory regime that they have chosen has some relationship to their goals of protecting the integrity of the state's system. And that's certainly what the Court suggested in North Dakota.
 Well, I'm not sure. When you have facial discrimination against out-of-state products, I think you're -- the bar is a little higher than that.
 Well, that was the case in North Dakota, as well. In North Dakota, the state imposed regulations on out-of-state vendors that were extremely onerous, so onerous that some vendors said they wouldn't ship products at all. That was alcohol that was not even destined for consumption within the state; but on a federal enclave. And the mere risk of diversion into unregulated and unlawful channels was enough to allow the state to impose those discriminatory rules. The same is true here. Justice O'Connor, you also asked about Bacchus, as well, and I would like to take a moment to address that. Bacchus is distinguishable in several ways. First of all, Bacchus was a tax. And while we would argue that taxes could be used to further states' interest in suppressing consumption, for example, it is certainly not at the heart of the -- of the Twenty-First Amendment in the way that the direct regulation of alcohol across the border is.
 No, but if you can't grant a tax exemption -- and it seems to me, a fortiori -- you can't grant a prohibition about importing at all.
 I, respectfully, would disagree with that, Your Honor. If you can't address the alcohol that flows across the border, which was precisely why the Twenty-First Amendment was enacted, as well as Webb Kenyon, because the --
 No, I'm suggesting a tax on imports is less restrictive than a prohibition on imports.
 Well, we would certainly, you know, welcome the authority to do both, but importation is what is at the heart of the Twenty-First Amendment. Bacchus is also different, because, there, the state made no effort whatsoever to defend the statute with reference to any concerns related to the Twenty-First Amendment. And Bacchus --
 And according to the District Court, in this very case, the State Attorney General conceded that New York's measure allowing direct sales by in-state wineries was designed to benefit local farmers.
 That was an off-the-cuff remark by a single attorney, Your Honor, and that can't be taken as dispositive, given the state's vigorous defense of this statute. It also was regarding a provision that is not even directly before the Court right now which confers no different shipment privileges than are conferred on any winery, whether in-state or out-of-state, that would obtain a license to sell in New York.
 Thank you, Ms. Halligan.
 Thank you, Your Honor.
 Mr. Bolick, you have, let's see, about four minutes left.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens. Three very brief points. There his a panoply of tools available to states to police out-of-state wineries in direct shipping, as the Federal Trade Commission has recognized. They can, if they issue a permit, revoke that permit. And New York has authority to issue such permits under Section 105-9. The Twenty-First Amendment Enforcement Act, for which the liquor distributors and states lobbied very hard, gives injunction authority in the home federal courts. And, of course, the federal agency, the Tax and Trade Bureau, can revoke a permit if state law is violated. In the --
 Who's going to count the bottles? [Laughter.]
 Your Honor, the state -- the Federal Government is able to count those, but the evidence is that they don't. And that goes back to a question, I believe, Justice Souter asked. In the Michigan case, a question was posed in an interrogatory, "What enforcement by -- is done of in-state wineries." In that regard, the answer was, "None."
 How do you count bottles? I would have thought the consumers have all the bottles. [Laughter.]
 That's exactly right. And, certainly in the directly shipping context in-state, that is emphatically the case.
 I think they were referring to full bottles. I guess -- [Laughter.]
 With direct shipping --
 They've all been drinking -- [Laughter.]
 -- to arbitrators.
 With direct shipping, Justice Scalia, we can personalize things. In terms of the Bacchus case, as Justice Ginsburg pointed out, New York, like Hawaii, conceded protectionism. It is very rife in the legislative record in 1970, when the direct shipping was extinguished. In 1995, when Governor Pataki vetoed a bill that would have solved this problem, he said, and I quote -- and this is in the record, the Joint -- the Second Circuit Joint Appendix, at 442 -- he said, and I quote, "Since the vast majority of this country's wines are produced in California, I believe that this bill would inevitably lead to a significant increase in mail-order wines from that state into New York. This increase could, in turn, lead to a decrease in sales for New York liquor stores and their distributors, and shrink New York wineries' market share. That is protectionism." And, finally, the notion that small winemakers could go to all 50 states and open offices in order to do this -- if you could drive out to Middleburg and visit Juanita Swedenburg's winery -- and she invites you to do so -- [Laughter.]
 -- you will find Mrs. Swedenburg selling wine, harvesting grapes, and bottling. This is a ban on -- this is market foreclosure, sure and simple -- fewer than 600 wineries are represented on the stores of New York's shelves, out of over 3,000 wineries --
 The question --
 -- in the United States.
 -- really is whether the plain language of the Twenty-First Amendment allows that very protectionism.
 And I would refer you, in my brief time remaining, to the brief, the Carter-Phillips brief for the Napa Valley Vintners Association, the DKT Liberty brief, which go into the history of the Twenty-First Amendment, which was intended to restore the police power, which did not include the power to discriminate. Our clients cannot compete with the liquor distributors in the political marketplace in their -- in their -- in their home states. They can, however, compete in the economic marketplace. The Commerce Clause protects that right, that level playing field. The Twenty-First Amendment was never intended to take it away. We ask this Court, respectfully, to honor 124 years of precedent in the National Economic Union. If there are no further questions, thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Bolick. The case is submitted.
 Argument in Smith against the City of Jackson. Mr. Goldstein.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Petitioners submit that the Age Discrimination in Employment Act prohibits an employment practice that has a significant disparate impact on older workers if that practice lacks any reasonable business justification. The ADEA embodies Congress' determination that age discrimination seriously impedes older Americans' ability to participate fairly in the American work force.
 Mr. Goldstein, let me just interrupt a minute. You say if it lacks the -- the business justification. But is it not a part of -- that is not a part of the plaintiffs' primary submission, is it, that it does not show? That's an affirmative defense.
 Justice Stevens, there is not a clear answer to that question in all candor. It is not before the Court. I will tell you that the lower courts uniformly in the ADEA disparate impact context apply Justice O'Connor's plurality opinion in Watson and the Wards Cove rule rather than the post-1991 Civil Rights Act rule. That is a debatable proposition because, as your question suggests, in subsection (f)(1) of the statute where this provision comes from -- and let me just take us to the language. It would probably be most useful. In the blue book, the -- the blue petitioners' brief at page 1 are the relevant provisions. (a)(2) we'll come back to. That's the parallel language to Griggs. The reasonable factor other than age provision is (f)(1), and it says: it shall not be unlawful for an -- this is at the bottom of the page. It shall not be unlawful for an employer to take any action otherwise prohibited -- and I'm going to come back and focus on that -- under subsection (a) where the differentiation is based on reasonable factors other than age. The fact that it says otherwise prohibited seems to suggest that this is setting up an employer defense, as your question indicates. And the Court in the -- the Western Air Lines case in 1986 said that the BFOQ provision, which is in (f)(1) as well, is an affirmative defense. So I --
 You put your finger on exactly what's the part of this case that's bothering me. Read through the language. As you read through the language, disparate impact does seem to be called for, and this particular provision, reasonable factors other than age, seems a defense to that, just as BFOQ is the defense to disparate treatment. And that all seems to work. But you read the definition of reasonable factor other than age to mean business necessity or even Justice O'Connor's opinion, which is pretty tough. It's hard for an employer to make that defense. And while making it hard to make that defense in the case of gender or race discrimination, in fact works in my opinion perfectly well. You start making it hard to make that defense here and you're going to have a nightmare because every effort by any employer to equalize to any degree pay or treatment of his or her employees is going to have a disparate impact in respect to age because the correlation with age runs into all kinds of things that it doesn't in the other cases. So I can't believe that Congress really would have wanted that, but the reason I can't believe it is because I can't believe the business necessity part of it. And so here I'm faced with a reg which, at one and the same time, pulls in disparate impact and business necessity, and now I don't know what to do.
 I can tell you. (Laughter.)
 The answer is that you should recognize, as does the commission, which has delegated rulemaking authority under the act, that business necessity, which is the term of art that they used in the regulation -- and we'll come back to it. It's at page 2 of the blue brief -- means different things in different contexts. And so I want to take you to the specific citations where the EEOC has recognized the common sense principle. We know that more things that are legitimate employer practices correlate with age than they do with race and gender. It is --
 Mr. Goldstein, before you do that, before you deal with the EEOC regulation, this statute doesn't -- at least on -- on the page 1 part you called our attention to, doesn't refer to business necessity. That's in the EEOC regulation. If I were just reading this statute cold, I'd say, yes, that looks like an affirmative defense to me, but reasonable factor seems like something quite different than necessity. It isn't necessary for the business to do this, but it's reasonable. And if that's -- then the business necessity -- it seems to me, at least arguably, an improper construction of this act, that the EEOC got it wrong when it referred to business necessity. They were thinking of Griggs and -- and title VII, but this statute says reasonable factors.
 Yes. Our position relies only on the statute. We embrace the text of the statute. (f)(1) says that the employer's conduct merely has to be reasonable. We agree with that. The point I would then take you to is that in -- if the Court were interested in the regulation -- we don't think it's necessary to get to the regulation, but if it were, the EEOC has said that it too recognizes that the phrase, business necessity, in the context of the Age Act does not mean essential to the business. Let me tell you why it used the language it did, business necessity, in the regulation just to clear it up. And that is when this Court first used the words, business necessity, in Griggs and then subsequently in Wards Cove, it didn't have all the connotations that it does now as being quite a high employer burden. If I could just read to you two things from Griggs. Griggs said, the touchstone is business necessity. If the employment practice cannot be shown to be related to job performance, the practice is prohibited. It simply required related to job performance. That's the backdrop on which the EEOC used the word.
 Well, I'm not sure you're right about that, Mr. Goldstein, because if you think of what it was, it was a pen and paper test and it was a high school diploma. Now, an employer might well think I want to upgrade my work force. I want this to be a real classy work force. So I'm going to require a high school diploma. It isn't necessary, but why is it unreasonable for me to do that? So I -- I don't -- I think Griggs spoke about rules that were built in headwinds because a large part of the population didn't have the opportunity to get high school diplomas. That doesn't exist in the age discrimination area. So I -- I don't think that Griggs is an example of something that was a loose business necessity rule.
 My point is only terminological, and that is, when the EEOC used those words, it did not do so against a backdrop in which they carried a connotation that was necessarily very strict, and it has said several times -- and they are quoted in our brief -- that the standard -- and this is just the bottom line. I think it's a very important bottom line.
 You don't care about those regs anyway. Right?
 We do care about the regulations.
 Oh, you do. I thought you were saying you could make your case just on the --
 Well, we have --
 -- text of the statute.
 We can and will.
 Well, maybe you should because I'm not so sure that the EEOC interpretation is entitled to Chevron deference.
 We do believe that it is entitled to Chevron deference because they have delegated rulemaking authority and there is some suggestion that the because of language in subsection --
 But was this an actual rule after notice and comment, or is it a -- an interpretation?
 It is a post-notice and comment rule.
 But -- but it interprets -- doesn't interpret the prohibitory section. I mean, it -- it might be understood as simply making an assumption that, say, the Griggs rule would be applied in -- in this Court.
 It's conceivable you could read it that way, although the EEOC has specified many times, in the quarter century since it enacted the regulation, that no, when we -- and let me take us to the text to explain why, and that again is at page 2 of the blue brief. They said -- and this is the block quote. When an employment practice, including a test, is claimed as a basis for different treatment of employees or applicants for employment on the grounds that it is a factor other than age, and such practice has an adverse impact on individuals. That's the reference to disparate impact. The regulatory materials cite to Griggs. But in all events, I do want to come back to the bottom line, and that is the EEOC recognizes, we recognize that it's easier to prove either a defense or to put the burden on the plaintiff's case. It's a -- you have a higher hurdle --
 Easier -- easier is a matter of degree.
 Yes.
 And reasonable factor could be interpreted to say what the employer -- but the employer just doesn't like paying these executives so much money when these new younger janitors make so little. And so he says, I want to pay the new younger janitors more. Okay? There we've got it. Disparate impact.
 No.
 And now you say, what's the business necessity? And frankly, there wasn't one. It's just that I found it sort of bad. All right? So there we are. I've lost my case. Now, that's what is worrying me, and I thought perhaps this reg that seems to say -- and lower courts have accepted that I would lose my case -- that this reg is outside Congress' -- the agency's authority for that reason because Congress couldn't have intended that result.
 Well, let me take you to the lines of cases that I think might concern you. There were a set of cases before this Court's decision in Hazen Paper that involved two rules, Justice Breyer, and I will tell you that you referred to in the Adams oral argument when this case -- this issue came to you before. And so I want to refer to a very specific set of cases. There were a set of cases before 1993 in which there was some correlation. High salary correlated with age. And the courts of appeals, the Third -- the Second Circuit in the Geller case and the Eighth Circuit in the Leftwich case treated that as effectively a disparate treatment -- disparate treatment case because of the high level of correlation. The more recent cases reject that result and we embrace the more recent cases. And I want to cite them to you so you could look them up if you wanted. The Evers case, which is 241 F.3d 948; the Williams case, which is 112 F.Supp.2d 267; and the last one is Newport Mesa, 893 F.Supp 927. These cases recognized that cost is a perfectly legitimate business justification, and they put a single burden on the employer. Now, let me just -- just to say, most impact cases aren't cost cases, but I know it's a concern. They say, look, if you want to cut your costs and get rid of your more expensive work force, we're only going to ask you to do one thing, and that is allow your more senior workers to take a pay cut. They do not say, as did the older cases, that it causes disparate impact and you lose your case. And so we don't --
 Mr. Goldstein, you -- this is -- this case arises out of a compensation program of the employer, and why is it brought under 4(a)(2) instead of 4(a)(1) which addresses discrimination in compensation?
 Justice O'Connor, the lower courts unanimously conclude, as does the commission, that (a)(2), although it does not have the word compensation in it, does apply to compensation and --
 But why in light of 4(a)(1)?
 Because they understand 4(a) -- and let me take you -- everyone to the text just so we can all be literally on the same page, and that is going to be in the red brief at page 17a. It is 623(a), and it's the first block quote at the top of page 17a of the red brief. They understand that 623(a)(1) refers to actions against individuals, whereas 623(a)(2) refers to actions against groups, group policy versus individual action, and they do that because of the introductory language to (a)(1) and (a)(2), to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual; whereas, (a)(2) refers to limit, segregate, or classify his employees.
 May I ask a question at this point going really back to the question I asked you at the outset of the argument? If I thought seniority or years of service was a reasonable factor other than age and if I thought this particular compensation program was based on years of service rather than age, can I look at the reasonable factor other than age in deciding whether your complaint states a cause of action?
 Yes. Hazen Paper established that that is not --
 And if I do look at it and if I do come to the conclusion I've suggested, would I not have to dismiss your complaint?
 I may misunderstand the hypothetical, Justice Stevens.
 The hypothetical -- and I think it may be the case -- that you have a compensation program which uses years of service as a basis for classifying employees which has a disparate impact on older workers, but it does -- also it relies squarely on a reasonable factor other than age if you will call years of service such a factor.
 Yes. That's perfectly legitimate. That -- as I understand the hypothetical --
 -- suppose I want --
 I understand that to be this case.
 No, it would not because the rationale given by the employer here for -- let -- let me take us to the facts and then the explanation that's given by the employer. What happened here is they gave all of the line police officers much bigger raises than they gave to the more senior officers. That -- and the difference in pay between protected persons under the ADEA and non-protected persons was 4 standard deviations, a 1 in 10,000 chance, statisticians will tell you. And they said --
 No, but the basis for differentiation was years of service, was it not?
 The basis for differentiation was years of service, but the question is in -- is it a reasonable choice by the employer in this context. And the reason is it's a --
 Well, I'm just asking in the abstract. Why wouldn't that always be a -- a reasonable factor other than age?
 I apologize. That -- and so I think I answered your hypothetical too broadly. And that is, it depends. In the great majority of cases, employers certainly can say I want to give a class of employees more money. Perfectly sensible. Congress didn't intend to block that. But the question is, is this outside the usual set of cases? And the city's explanation what -- for this policy, which was to give the line cops more money but not the rest of the cops who happen to all be over 40, was that they wanted to bring the salary up to a -- a regional average. And so we asked the question, does this accomplish that in a reasonable way, and it does not because they left out huge categories of employees.
 But the factor -- if I understand it, it wasn't because they were line officers, it was rather because they had lesser years of service than the more senior officers.
 No.
 No.
 That is not the facts here. That's right. They -- they did not say we are going to give pay raises to the people who have lesser years of service because we're concerned about their pay. To the contrary. Let me take you to one piece of the record that I think will be helpful. Although again the cases presents the legal question, the lower court on remand can resolve the case. But at page 15 of the joint appendix, there is the pay plan itself, and the first sentence is that -- they -- explains the purpose. The -- the city wanted to provide a compensation plan that will attract and retain qualified people, and then it says, to all employees regardless of age. They purported to be giving the same treatment to everyone regardless --
 I don't think the statement of purpose tells me what the -- what the criterion for the different treatment was. I still think it was years of service.
 Justice Stevens, I -- I just think that -- it misunderstands the facts as I know them in this particular case.
 What was the criterion?
 The criterion was that they took the -- they had different kinds of officers. They had police -- line police officers, master sergeants, all the way on up through the system.
 So in other words, the criterion was the kind of rank they had before.
 Yes, and then --
 Why isn't that a reasonable factor other than age?
 The question is not whether that because that's not -- having those criterion is perfectly reasonable. The question is, is it reasonable -- and this would be resolved on remand -- to give raises to only one of those categories when your explanation is that you were trying to give raises to bring everyone up to a regional average? And so, Justice Stevens, I think --
 In other words, you say the -- the question isn't whether they used a reasonable factor other than age. Your question is whether the use of those factors was overall reasonable.
 Yes. There are two things.
 That's a rewriting of the statute.
 Oh, I -- I don't think so, Justice Stevens. It's the same question that we ask in title VII, and that is, was it a -- a -- there's a higher bar there, but were you pursuing a -- a legitimate goal and did you -- did you pursue it in a reasonable way? That's why a title VII plaintiff -- and this has -- and I do want to come back --
 Title VII doesn't have this language in it.
 That's absolutely right, but it's not language here that would detract from that structure of the -- of the title VII inquiry. All the lower courts, for example, agree that it -- as I said, follows the pre --
 Here you're saying you're not attacking reasonable factor other than age. It has to be based on reasonable factor other than age. And I take it here you're saying it's not based on what they advance as reasonable factors.
 Yes. They give --
 Is that right?
 Yes. They give an explanation.
 But if I -- I say my explanation for why I pay the newer people more is really I like to have that atmosphere. You make less money in my business, but it's more democratic and people are happier even though no one will invest in my company. (Laughter.)
 But still, I'd like a commune. All right? That's how I want to do it. Now, that's not totally idiotic. It's plausible. So I just win. Right?
 No. You would lose a treatment case.
 Ah, I lose a treatment case. No, no. I'm not -- I'm just -- it's I'm not paying the younger workers more. I'm paying the newer workers more. All right? They happen to be much the same category, but I -- I don't want it. It's not age. Or, you know, I pay the lower paid workers more. How's that? Do I win?
 You paid the lower paid workers more?
 Yes. I paid the lower paid workers more? I want to bring them up to the executives. I -- I like it. It's more democratic and it makes a happier group. And -- and so, now, do I win or lose?
 You, in all likelihood, win in that hypothetical. You --
 I win. And I don't have to say any more than that.
 No. But let me tell you, it's still a very important statute because -- for the reason that I framed before, and that is, most cases that are ADEA disparate impact cases are not cost cases. There are other tests: applications procedures, strength tests, and the like. That's what the EEOC believes is still very essential. So while we don't impose a big burden on employers in the cost context for the reasons that you and Justice Stevens have been exploring, that doesn't mean our position is somehow worthless. The EEOC has said that the disparate impact plays a, quote/unquote, vital role under the ADEA and that the respondents' position would greatly weaken the statute because --
 There haven't been a whole lot of cases under the impact theory as applied to age, and you just said you're not talking about the cost category but that -- you mentioned physical fitness. And there was a case. Smith against Des Moines involved that, but it was found the -- the physical fitness test was job-related. Have there been mutual rules with a disparate impact that you can give us as examples? When you're talking about race and sex, the examples come to mind much more readily than in the age category.
 Yes, I can. I'll give you two sets of examples. The first is the examples identified by the Solicitor General in his cert petition defending the EEOC's position in the Francis W. Parker case in 1994. The EEOC pursued cases -- and they're cited in the cert petition -- involving rules that prohibit -- that require recent college graduates to get a job that forbid hiring someone who worked previously for a higher salary than they would be getting in the new -- in the new job and that laid off people who would be eligible to retire soon. So those are the examples the Solicitor General gave. I'll give you two other examples. One is a -- a case called --
 These are examples of -- violations or things that are okay?
 Violations. I apologize. The EEOC filed suit because of these violations of the act.
 Why isn't it a reasonable factor other than age that I don't want to hire somebody who's going to retire a year after I hire him?
 Because it's not --
 Gee, that seems to me terribly reasonable.
 The --
 I don't care how old he is. I don't want anybody who's going to retire the year after I hire him. I don't want to have to go through this -- this whole process again.
 The view of the commission -- it's one I share, but a particular court might not -- is that that is not a good -- a reasonable work place judgment. One could disagree with it. But the -- those employees will be very valuable. And it's not that they will retire, I should make clear. It's that they're eligible to retire. It -- it may well be a different case if you could say, I asked the person. They said they're leaving in a year. The rule challenged there was mere eligibility to retire, and they did give the other examples. I didn't finish with the court cases. They are Klein, which is 807 F.Supp. 1517, which is a hiring test I think by the FAA in that case that -- that happened to exclude all of the people, I think, over the age of 55. And there are other cases that are, in the line of cases that I was discussing with Justice Breyer, in which the employer doesn't say -- doesn't give the person who gets the higher pay the option of taking a pay cut before being fired. So the statute, both in the non-cost context and the cost context, has very important applications. I did want to return to your correct premise, however, Justice Ginsburg. You said there aren't many cases. I think it's important to recognize that the -- the important, legitimate cases, by and large, are conciliated by the EEOC. Remember, it goes through an administrative process first. The EEOC found a violation here, gave us a right to sue letter. The -- the city just declined to settle with us. There have been -- and I have checked. There have been 74 disparate impact cases in the history of the statute that are reported in the Federal courts, and I think that is a good answer to the idea of the respondents that this will impose a huge burden on employers, the idea that there will be a massive amount of litigation. Remember --
 Well, once we -- if we were to say it's covered, don't you think that number would expand?
 It's possible it would expand some, but I do think we're right to say not much because --
 Well, it's not the number of cases either. I mean, you could have -- it wouldn't take much to have a single case that has a rule in it, say, that makes it very difficult for an employer to do things of type X or type Y, and that would have enormous impact even though you'd say, well, it was just one case.
 Well, there are two fears I think the respondents have articulated, neither of which are borne out by actual experience because, Justice O'Connor, the EEOC has recognized these claims for a quarter century. Until 1993, every single circuit agreed with us, and right now three circuits agree with us. So I -- there is a large body of experience that suggests -- and that's where those 74 cases come from. So, Justice Breyer, they have two concerns. One is the mere notion of the possibility of liability will -- and the prospect of how expensive litigation would be -- would be deterring valuable employment practices. That's not borne out by experience. Your point is, well, what if the liability threshold is too high? And experience suggests and the rules endorsed by the commission and the lower courts are that the liability threshold is not too high. I did also want to say that it is the liability threshold that is the key for deciding how to accommodate the respondents' concerns. Justice O'Connor's Watson plurality opinion explains that the evidentiary standards that apply in these disparate impact cases should serve as adequate safeguards. The precise, same argument was made by the business community in Watson, saying, look, we're going to have to adopt quotas. This will be entirely unmanageable. Before I sit down and reserve the remainder of my time, I did want to say we have a really good case, to refer back to my last argument, and that's Griggs, which is about the exact same statutory text. And then we have a line, a wall that is uninterrupted of this Court's authority. Six straight decisions say when the statute -- title VII says something and the ADEA says the same thing, they have the parallel construction. And in our view the respondents' arguments aren't good enough to overcome the double hurdle of stare decisis and Chevron deference. If I could reserve the remainder of my time.
 Mr. Nager.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: If I may, I'd like to go straight to the question as to why mere statistical correlations with age don't create a prima facie case of discrimination because of age. This Court in its title VII cases has said that a mere statistical correlation with race or sex can create a prima facie case of discrimination because of race or sex because it's advanced a proposition that there's no inherent correlation between race and sex and ability to perform a job or do a job. And as a consequence, the Court has said that a statistical disparity is a departure from the expected norm. Thus, the statistical disparity creates a suspect situation which could be treated as a prima facie case of discrimination because of age, to use the Court's term in Watson, the functional equivalent of intentional discrimination. In the age context, the premise doesn't apply. In the age context, as Justice Breyer pointed out in the Florida Power argument, as he's pointed out again today, age is inherently correlated with myriad selection practices. It's painful to say, particularly to a Court that's a little bit older than I am, but our mental and physical capacities are not constant over our lifetimes. They're different for each one of us, but statistically they change over time and they deteriorate over time, and progress doesn't treat the skills and abilities that we have with -- the same way to people who are at different stages in life. Our education and our technological --
 Verdi wrote Falstaff when he was 70 -- late -- in his late 70's. It was his greatest creation. Something.
 There is no doubt, particularly in occupations like judging -- (Laughter.)
 -- that experience and wisdom may be something that grow over a lifetime. But as we know --
 Wunsler died at about 28, didn't he?
 No. 34.
 34, well --
 Let me -- let me ask you this. If -- if your argument has force, why haven't we been having horrible example piled upon horrible example since 1981 when the EEOC took the position that it takes?
 The answer to that is as follows, is that Justice -- Chief -- then Justice Rehnquist, now Chief Justice Rehnquist, wrote a dissent from denial at the time of Geller v. Markham. And in my practical experience -- and I do defend these cases for a living -- that put a tremendous chill on the plaintiffs bar, and there were very few of these cases brought. But contrary to Mr. Goldstein, who doesn't represent employers and help them plan their selection practices, employers made huge changes in the '80's and the early '90's until this Court's decision in Hazen Paper because employers were scared of these cases, and so employers started managing the numbers. There were a lot of reductions in force in the late '80's, as I'm sure this Court remembers, as our Nation went through a -- a industrial restructuring. And every one of those reductions in force, I had to sit down with my clients and break up the age of the work force into bands and see how people were going to be affected and move numbers. And the irony, of course, is -- is in doing that, employers adversely impact the very people who are benefited by the disparate impact doctrine under title VII because the Age Discrimination Act principally favors more senior, older white males, and when you try to manage your numbers so that you don't adversely impact older white males, what happens is -- is you adversely impact the new entrants to the work force who in the last 25 years have been much greater numbers of racial minorities and females.
 What do you do about the EEOC's regulation? Why isn't that -- why isn't that entitled to Chevron deference?
 Let me answer that. First of all, the -- the answer is, is you only get to Chevron deference if this statute is not subject to construction by this Court in phase one of Chevron. The first question is can this Court, looking at the language of the statute and the other legal materials, interpret the statute to have a single, reasonably clear meaning.
 How can we possibly say that it's not ambiguous when we have, in another context, interpreted the identical language to permit --
 Just the way this Court did last term in the General Dynamics case, which I realize you dissented on this point, Justice Scalia. But just last term in the General Dynamics case, this Court held that the phrase, because of age, is idiomatically and contextually different than the phrase, because of race or sex. And my point to Justice Breyer is -- is that the phrase, because of age, cannot properly be construed to be satisfied by a mere statistical correlation with age.
 In that -- in that case, we were construing the word age and age definitely has a different meaning from sex or -- or race.
 I'm not saying that the -- the General Dynamics case disposes of this case, Justice Stevens. I'm simply pointing out that, as Justice Souter's opinion for the Court last term held, that similar language in similar statutes can have different meaning and not be ambiguous.
 Yes, but not whole texts, not -- I don't remember whether it was (1)-(1) and (2) or (a) and (b), but this is not a word, age. It's -- it's lines and lines, and to -- and to say, oh, in Griggs we held that the title VII language -- this language means you can have a disparate impact theory, but in age, we're going to read those very same words to prohibit. In one sense -- one you read to say, these words permit disparate impact, and then you read the same words to say these words prohibit --
 No.
 -- disparate impact.
 That is not quite right, Justice Ginsburg. What we're saying is -- is that the natural meaning of the phrase, because of, either in title VII or in the Age Act, is a natural, more conventional reference to intent. Nonetheless, the Court, because of the objectives of title VII and because statistical correlations could equal a functional equivalent of intentional discrimination, construed title VII to go beyond intent-based claims to encompass disparate impact claims. Our point to the Court today is -- is that neither of those two critical premises apply, that a mere correlation with age does not, in the context of age, equal a prima facie case of --
 If that's so, Congress shouldn't have copied the language of title VII. It isn't a matter of it just accidentally comes out to -- to be sounding the same, as though, you know, two monkeys did it on a typewriter or something. They copied -- they copied title VII.
 Well, they copied it before Griggs was decided, indeed, before any agency of Government, before any court in this country, and before any academic in this country had floated the concept --
 Well, I think it's a fair conclusion that they meant the two to mean the same thing, whether it was before Griggs or after Griggs. They copied the language. It seems to me they wanted the two to mean the same.
 I -- I think that that's wrong, Justice Scalia.
 Or -- or at least it is arguably so, in which case you come back to my question. Why isn't the -- the EEOC's resolution of that ambiguity conclusive?
 Well, let me answer that question directly and then come back and argue with you about your premise. If you turn to the appendix and on the red brief, page 56a is the regulation. And it is -- as Justice Kennedy pointed out, it is not an interpretation of the prohibition of the statute. It is an interpretation of the reasonable factor other than age provision. And as an initial point, I'd submit to you, Justice Scalia, that it's one thing to defer to an agency's interpretation of the provision that you're being asked to construe in resolving what the meaning of the provision you're being asked to construe is. It's another thing to defer to their interpretation of a distinct provision which isn't a prohibition at all. Let me move on and let's read what it says, though. What it says is -- is the following. It's interpreting a phrase that says is based on a reasonable factor other than age, which Mr. Goldstein has conceded in his brief and the petitioners in the Florida Power case also conceded is necessarily a reference to intentionality. But there's not a word in this regulation about employer intentions. Quite the contrary. And the reason why I -- I asked you to turn to page 56a of our brief rather than the quotation of the regulation in Mr. Goldstein's brief is because there's an additional sentence in the regulation that Mr. Goldstein didn't print in his brief, and that is that the EEOC said where tests are involved --
 Where -- where are you reading from?
 Page 56a of the red brief. I'm sorry, Justice. It's section (d).
 (e)?
 (d) as in David. What the EEOC said is that the reasonable factors other than age provision is not an intent-based provision. It's a business necessity provision. They did it, saying it means the same thing as it's -- as it means in title VII because their whole purpose here was to conform the Age Act to title VII, and they said you have to comply, where tests are involved, with the Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection that they jointly promulgated with the Department of Labor, the Justice Department, and the Civil Service branch, whose name has escaped me right now.
 Mr. Nager, I'm lost. What -- what part of 56a are you referring to? (d)?
 (d) on page 56a. I'm sorry?
 Does it say what you just said?
 Tests which are asserted -- the last sentence. Tests which are asserted as reasonable factors other than age will be scrutinized in accordance with the standards set forth at part 1607 of this title. Part 1607 of this title is the Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection.
 All that's true, but they -- they did promulgate this guideline, as far as -- I looked it up. At that time, they said, look, it's going to be disparate impact, and they cited Griggs. And people have put comments, which I haven't read yet, but I imagine the comments went to disparate impact. And then when they rewrote it in this form, they have a little paragraph of explanation which makes pretty clear it's meant to be disparate impact.
 I have no doubt that they were assuming that this Court's decision in Griggs -- because this is what they said in their comments -- this Court's decision in Griggs required disparate impact analysis --
 Well, all right. But I mean, they -- everybody knew what they were driving at at the time they promulgated this. So it seemed to me that if -- if we're not governed by the reg, it must be because the reg is outside the statutory authority. And it might be outside the statutory authority if in fact it embodies too tough a test.
 It's -- it's outside the -- the statutory authority for two reasons.
 But now we've heard it doesn't embody that much of a tough test, and you know, the EEOC isn't here to tell us --
 Well --
 -- what in fact it thinks.
 Mr. Goldstein cited a bunch of EEOC briefs in his brief, and you'll notice he didn't quote a single part of -- of those EEOC briefs which say that the standard under the Age Act is less than the standard under the Age Act. What he cites to is a footnote in his opening brief where he quotes one sentence from an EEOC brief where an EEOC appellate lawyer said it is -- is likely that an employer will be able to prevail more often. The EEOC never said -- and -- and I litigate against them. I can tell you the only thing that they would hate less but hate a lot than your ruling in our favor that there's no disparate impact claims at all is that Mr. Goldstein has represented what their version of the defense is because that's not the Government's position.
 All right. So we don't know what the Government's position is. They're not here. So suppose I think, one, the language is against you, the language of the statute. I do think it's against you. Two, the EEOC reg does foresee a disparate impact test. Three, the practicalities are absolutely with you, and that has to go with the scope of the statute. And four, it might be possible for the EEOC to write a reg that deals with the problems you're worried about while advancing a disparate impact test. Suppose I think all those things --
 Which one --
 -- which are at least consistent. What would I do with this case? That's my problem.
 Okay. I -- I would submit that you should --
 Where the Government hasn't appeared and told us what they want to do or what they think should be done, et cetera.
 I -- I should -- I would submit, Justice Breyer, that you should reexamine your premise that the language of the Age Act, both in section 4(a) by itself and construed in light of 4(f) and the legislative history and purposes of the statute encompass disparate impact claims.
 Maybe the EEOC regulation was not so much an interpretation of the statute as an interpretation of Griggs.
 Oh, I think that's --
 I mean, maybe this provision represents the judgment of the agency that Griggs applies to this other statute, and -- and I'm not sure that we owe Chevron deference to that determination.
 Well, I -- I don't think you did, although I don't even think, frankly, from what I've read is they made the judgment. They made the assumption.
 Yes, well.
 Mr. Nager, will you go to another one of Justice Breyer's premises? He says following the practicalities are with you, which you're certainly going to accept. He says I think the EEOC can deal with some of these practical problems. Do you think so? Why not?
 Great question and the answer is no, they can't. And the reason is --
 Give me some examples.
 The reason is -- is because if you -- if you lower the prima facie case so that it's meaningless, so that it means that all a plaintiff has to do is find a selection practice -- because it's always going to correlate with age -- it means you shifted the burden to an employer in every case to establish that its -- its practice meets whatever standard your hypothesizing the EEOC might come up with later, Justice Breyer. Meanwhile, the world has to go on, and what my clients will do is as follows. They will say, well, you know, we're not going to wait to see if -- if this new practice we're going to consider is going to stand the test of time in court and under the EEOC's yet-to-be-articulated regulation. We're going to stick with the tried and true. We are not going to innovate at all, and if we're going to innovate, we're going to massage the numbers while we do it. The employers --
 That would be a fairly easy burden -- a fairly easy burden to meet. And -- and to give you a fairly easy burden is consistent with the idea of trying to get employers to think about the problem. An employer who uses a different factor which is correlated with age but it's -- it's an unreasonable thing to do or it isn't the real basis hasn't thought about the harm that he's working.
 Well, as --
 So we could give you an easy burden and still accomplish the objective.
 I -- I don't want to resist the easy burden, but I do want to tell you, as Justice Scalia pointed out in the Florida Power argument, my clients do think about these things because if -- you know, if they adopt an unreasonable practice that has an adverse statistical effect and they think they're likely to get sued about it, they actually do have to worry about it because these cases are tried to juries and they have to have a reasonable explanation for what their practice because they get tried to juries as disparate treatment cases. Our point is not that statistics are not admissible. They are. Our point is -- is that they're not sufficient by themselves to create a prima facie case of -- because of age, as it would be in a title VII case where we wouldn't expect to see the statistical disparity. So it's fair to say that there's a reasonable adverse inference to be drawn from the existence of the disparity itself. That is the premise articulated by this Court as to why the disparate impact doctrine can -- can at -- the prima facie case aspect of it equals a prima facie case of discrimination because of race or sex. That is not true here. Now, it is also the case that when this Court adopted the disparate impact doctrine, it said it placed an enormous weight on the objectives of title VII's prohibitions, which it construed to be, as Justice Ginsburg pointed out, eliminating these built-in headwinds. Well, when -- when the Secretary of Labor proposed the Age Discrimination Act, he gave a report to Congress and he said age discrimination is different than race and sex discrimination. It is not based on animus. It is -- it is not dealing with a group of individuals who have suffered cumulative disabilities over their lifetime because of historic discrimination. He said it's -- the problem of age discrimination is the problem of over-generalization by an employer.
 But he gave the very same example that was Griggs. He gave the example of the high school diploma because he thought that people of a certain age, when there wasn't such general education as there is today, might not have a high school diploma to a much higher extent than the people who came -- the generation who came after.
 But his solution was not a disparate impact doctrine. His solution was --
 Well, it's a little, and you said his solution was we're going to have training and manuals and all. But that's not altogether clear.
 Well, take a look at the statute, Justice Ginsburg. Please look at page 15a and 16a in the red brief. And if you look at section 621(b) -- it's at the bottom of page 15a of the red brief -- Congress said what the purposes of the Age Discrimination Act were, and it had three, but it's only addressed one through the prohibition. The second one was to prohibit arbitrary age discrimination in employment. The other two were to promote employment of older persons based on ability and to help employers and workers find ways of meeting problems arising from the impact of age on employment. And if you turn the page and look at section 622(a)(1), the very first thing Congress mandates that the Secretary shall do to address its other two purposes, to undertake research and promote research with a view to reducing barriers to the employment of older persons and the promotion of measures for using their skills. What the Secretary of Labor's report goes on at length about is it identifies all kinds of factors, neutral and non-neutral --
 But it doesn't say there that that is to implement the first -- that -- that only the second one, to prohibit arbitrary age discrimination.
 It does -- what it -- you're right it doesn't say the following. It doesn't say, and we don't want disparate impact, because in 1967 the -- the concept of disparate impact as a legal theory was unknown to Congress, to the courts, and to the administrative agencies. But what the Secretary of Labor did do in his report is, after identifying all of the problems that adversely affect older workers, he says, I recommend a two-pronged approach. One prong is prohibitory. It's coercive. You shall not -- we'll prohibit arbitrary age discrimination in employment, which the Secretary explained to Congress, and this Court last term said itself, means a -- is a -- is -- is the use of age as the decision-making criteria. He said, separately we should have a series of programs that seek to enlarge the abilities of older workers, that seek to educate employers about the abilities of older workers through non-coercive programs. And so what this statute does -- and this Court has said it in several of its cases -- this statute was based upon the Secretary of Labor's report. The Secretary wrote the bill, and although Congress amended it in other ways, it didn't amend any of these provisions. That this statute took a more nuanced approach to deal with a distinctly different problem, and the problem --
 Mr. Nager, at the end of his report, Secretary Wirtz said the -- a purpose, to eliminate discrimination in the employment of older workers, it would necessary not only to deal with overt acts of discrimination, but also to adjust those present employment practices which quite unintentionally lead to age limits in hiring. And your point, as I understand it, yes, that was one of his purposes, but he meant that one to be accomplished with ERISA and other things like that.
 Well, the quote that you just gave says that there are express uses of age and there are non-age reasons that lead to the use of express limits of age, for example, the hypothetical that Justice Scalia gave with Mr. Goldstein, saying, well, I wouldn't want to hire someone who's going -- who tells me they're going to retire a year from now. But if he said I'm not going to hire you because you're 64 because I know you're going to -- people retire at 65 mostly, that would be the same kind of non-age-based motive that nevertheless used age as a decision-making criteria. That's what that quote is referring to. If you -- if you -- the second half --
 The quote -- the reference to employment practices which quite unintentionally lead to age limits in hiring. I see what you're saying.
 Right. And then -- and -- and the point here is this was thought out. It wasn't thought out as disparate treatment versus disparate impact because the concepts didn't exist at the time, but it was thought out as arbitrary age discrimination versus other factors that adversely bear on older workers. The prohibitions went to arbitrary age discrimination and didn't go to the adverse impacts. It was the -- the non-coercive measures that went to the adverse impacts. Let me go also --
 No how does that work? Because the -- the particular language, it shall be unlawful for an employer to classify his employees in any way that would adversely affect an individual's status -- his status, it says -- as an employee because of such individual's age. Now, that sounds as if it's driving right at disparate impact. It's -- it's unlawful to classify an employee in any way that would adversely affect him because of his age. That's what it says. And then you turn to the defense and it says, but there's the defense with a differentiation, i.e., the classification is based on reasonable factors other than age. And therefore it would sound as if it says, look at the factor and ask is the factor reasonable. If so, the employer wins if it's really based on that factor.
 Two points?
 Yes.
 One is -- is --
 How do we get out of that language?
 Well, we love the language. We don't have to get out of it. It says because of age. That's a reference, a traditional, conventional reference --
 No, no, but it says -- it says that would adversely affect him because of his age.
 Well, the first -- before the comma is the statement both of the action of the employer and the injury that it has to cause in order for a claim to exist, and then there's another requirement. The requirement is -- is that the action and the -- the effect of -- the injury that's affected by it be -- because of age. That is a conventional reference to intent. And the confirmation that it's a reference --
 Oh, no. It's not intent because to read it as part of classifying, which you'd have to do to get it because of intent, you'd have to say to classify his employees because of such individual's age. Now, that's a little tough because you're talking about employees, and then you go to such individual.
 It -- it -- the phrase, because of age, modifies all of the words that precede the comma that separates the two.
 Segregate or classify. You want to read it all the way up back to segregate or classify.
 Well, I -- I think it does modify the verb, but --
 It would be good if you had a comma after employees. I -- I might go along with you if there was a comma after -- to limit, segregate, or classify his employees, comma, in any way which would deprive or tend to deprive any individual of opportunities or otherwise affect his status as an employee, comma, because of such individual's age -- go way back to before the comma. I can see that, but without the comma, that's -- that's an awful travel back to limit, segregate, or classify.
 Well, I -- I think that's the grammatically correct way to read it. But even -- even if it was just modifying the adversely affect --
 It would be the natural way.
 -- it would still be because of age.
 The natural way -- wait. The natural way is to read it as modifying to deprive --
 Right.
 -- or otherwise adversely affect.
 Exactly.
 That's the natural way to read it.
 It is.
 Now --
 One still --
 -- suppose we read it that way. Then what do you say?
 You -- even if you read it that way, it still says, comma, because of age, and the because of age is a reference to intent, and the confirmation of that, Justice Breyer, is the defense that you keep pointing to because as Mr. Goldstein conceded in his brief and as you pointed out in your questioning, it says, is based on. That is also a reference to intent. This statute is preoccupied with intent. What section 4(f) was about was identifying the situations in which age would be used but it, nonetheless, wouldn't even be arbitrary --
 Indeed, and I guess what supports that reading is that intent -- intent to discriminate in hiring -- the intentional discrimination because of age in hiring is covered by (2) rather than (1) isn't it?
 No, no, no.
 You think -- I mean, if -- if you have a rule -- if you have a rule that you won't hire any employee -- I mean, we -- we were talking earlier about the -- the reason -- (2) reads employees in the plural, and (1) reads refuse to hire or discharge any individual. So if you have any intentional discrimination that is against a class, it comes under (2) rather than (1).
 I had never thought of construing the --
 Is that wrong? Well, I thought -- I thought that's what -- what counsel for the petitioner was telling us.
 Well, if -- if he did, he's only strengthened our case. What I want to say to the Court is -- is that both of those provisions are modified by the phrase, because of age. This Court in Hazen Paper construed the because of language in 4(a)(1) as a reference to intent and said statistical correlations with age are not sufficient to establish because of age within the meaning of section 4(a)(1). And the presumption of uniform usage -- we're entitled to point to it as well that the presumption of uniform usage which would be that the phrase, because of age, in section 4(a)(2) is also not satisfied by a mere statistical correlation with age. And the reason why title VII is different than the Age Act -- I keep coming back to this because this is so critical, Justice Breyer -- is that the premise of the Court's statistical cases under title VII is that it's -- it presumes that there's no inherent difference in ability between the races and the genders, whereas you know and I know that there is a difference in an -- an inherent correlation between abilities and skills, between people of different ages statistically. And so that whereas in the -- in the race and sex context, a statistical disparity by itself points out that there's something suspect and so would justify putting the employer to the burden on those occasions which would happen. And by definition, I think you and I both think, Justice Breyer, that it's not all that often that you're going to have these statistical disparities in the race and sex context. In the age context, they happen all the time. So it's -- it -- there's no basis for suggesting that a statistical correlation by itself creates something suspect, and it would rob the notion of a prima facie case of any meaning to say that -- that a statistical correlation with age, which we expect to see all the time, would establish a prima facie wrong. And, of course, the Secretary of Labor wrote a report telling Congress that race and sex were different than age for this very reason.
 But in your view, is based on reasonable factors other than age strictly an affirmative defense?
 I -- I think that it is -- it was intended to address mixed motive cases. That's why it was added. I think it is a indicia of the fact that this statute is concerned with intent in its prohibitions only. I'm not saying it's conclusive of that, but I'm saying it's another indicia, that if you look at all of section 4(f), it's about the instances in which age is being used --
 But is it an affirmative defense?
 I -- I don't think that it is, and I -- I --
 Well, did you challenge the sufficiency of this complaint on the ground that it did not allege that the -- the program was not based on -- was based on factors that were unreasonable?
 I -- I didn't handle the case in the trial court, but I believe that the -- our -- our client denied all of the allegations in the complaint and affirmatively said this was -- its salary program was a reasonable factor other than age, yes. And certainly in the courts below, the reasonable --
 What I'm trying to think through is whether that issue is one that can be resolved on the pleadings, or does it always require a trial.
 Well, I think the question of whether or not the reasonable factor other than age provision, when read in conjunction with section (a)(4) -- 4(a) shows that this is an intent-based statute, as a pure legal question, can be judged on the pleadings. The -- the question of whether or not a -- in a particular fact situation something is a reasonable factor other than age or not I think would be subject to what the proof is. It might be undisputed.
 On your reading, I just don't see that there's any function. I mean, if disparate impact is out of it, then -- then what work is there for the reasonable factor other than age to do?
 It was added in as a safe harbor to address mixed motive cases. There was a concern at the time that since employers had been using age as the decision-making factor, that they would continue to think about it, and the question was raised, well, would that mean that the very fact they thought of it, even though they had a nondiscriminatory reason, mean that they still violated the act? And the Secretary said, no, we've put in this reasonable factor other than age provision to make it clear. It -- it was simply a safe harbor.
 Thank you, Mr. Nager. I think you've answered the question. Mr. Goldstein, you have 4 minutes, and let's make it 4 and a half.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens. I want to start with our affirmative case which is one of stare decisis and then go to what I think is the thing that might concern the Court and that's the practicalities of implementing our rule. Our stare decisis case I think is fairly decisive. The language of title VII was the model for the ADEA. It runs all the way through the same in subsection (a)(2). This Court construed the text of the statute to give rise to disparate impact liability, and there are six cases of this Court that say when the language is the same, because one was derived from the other, we give them the same meaning. Now, I take it that the respondents have three answers to that. The first is they attempt to rewrite the rationale of Griggs and say Griggs really isn't so much about the text of the statute. It's what Congress was getting after, and this Court in Griggs was principally concerned with the fact that, look, in the context of age and sex discrimination, there's no legitimate correlation between an -- a disparate impact and a legitimate employer policy. That is not, in fact, what the rationale of Griggs is. The rationale of Griggs is that it doesn't matter to the employee if you are purposefully discriminated against or accidentally discriminated against. Congress was concerned with the effects of discrimination. And this Court reached that conclusion based on the text of the statute. If I could read from Griggs, quote, the objective of Congress in the enactment of title VII is plain from the language of the statute. That's the same language as in our statute. The thrust of section 703(a)(2) was to address, quote, the consequences of employment practices, not simply the motivation. This Court subsequently reiterated twice that disparate impact comes from the text of the statute, not from the air. Those two cases are quoted at page 9 of our reply brief and they resolve all doubts about commas and because of or anything like that. The Court in both Connecticut v. Teal and Justice O'Connor's opinion for the Court in Watson tied it directly to the statute. If I could just read the Watson example. Again, they're quoted in full. In disparate impact cases, quote, the employer's practices may be said to, quote, adversely affect an individual's status as an employee because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Now, the second argument they have -- and this was the Fifth Circuit's argument -- is the RFOA provision exists in the ADEA, not in title VII. I do not understand how the RFOA provision -- if it means anything, it doesn't help us. Again, let me take you back to the text. It's on page 1 of the blue brief. It's in a few other places, but it's there. It shall not be unlawful for an employer to take any action otherwise prohibited under subsection (a) where the differentiation is based on reasonable factors other than age. The necessary premise of that provision is that something will be otherwise unlawful when it's based on something other than age. It can't be talking about disparate treatment. The only kind of liability that involves factors other than age is impact. And then on top of that, Congress required that the employer's conduct be reasonable.
 What of dual motive?
 Because the statute refers to something otherwise unlawful, it can't be talking about Price Waterhouse mixed motive. Price Waterhouse mixed motive cases establish liability; i.e., you're not liable if you had another reason for doing it. But the premise of (f)(1) is that it's already otherwise unlawful, this is a defense to that. The third thing that they say is that in Hazen Paper this Court construed the because of language in (a)(1) not to refer to impact. The critical difference is that the (a)(1) language does not include the -- the clause that refers to the impact on the employee that Justice Stevens and Justice Breyer talked about with Mr. Nager. They're structured very differently. As to the practicalities, let me just say this has been the rule for a quarter century of the EEOC. It was the rule in every circuit until 1993. It is still the rule in three circuits. The notion that there is a big problem with administering it and that the EEOC can't recognize the -- as it has in all the examples we cite, that it's easier for an employer to prevail in the ADEA context is not accurate. I also want to just agree with Justice Breyer, that an important part of impact liability is just making employers think about it. And that comes from Justice Kennedy's opinion in McKennon where he said that disparate impact, quote, acts as a spur or catalyst to cause employers to self-examine and self-evaluate their employment practices to endeavor to eliminate, so far as possible, the last vestiges of discrimination.
 Thank you, Mr. Goldstein. The case is submitted.
 We will now hear argument in Veneman against the Livestock Marketing Association. Mr. Kneedler.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Congress enacted the Beef Promotion and Research Act in 1985 in the midst of a serious depression in the beef industry. The beef industry found itself unable to respond to that situation through the promotion of its products. Congress responded to that situation by establishing a government program of promotion, research, and consumer information. In the Beef Act, Congress prescribed the central message for advertising under the Act, Congress established a government body, the Beef Board, to administer and implement the program, and it placed the program under the control of a Cabinet officer, the Secretary of Agriculture.
 Mr. Kneedler, will you tell us how this case differs, if it does, from what was before the Court in United Foods? What meaningful distinctions do you find?
 Well, the important distinction is that the two grounds that -- on which we are defending the statute here were not addressed in United Foods. In particular, the government speech argument, that what I've just said goes to, that the Court specifically did not address because it had not --
 We've never addressed that in --
 In none of these cases, and --
 -- in these cases --
 Right.
 -- have we?
 The Court has not. And we think that that is -- the critical point about this -- about this case and these programs, these are government -- these are programs of government speech. As I said, Congress, itself, prescribed the central message. Congress established the government board, all of whose members are appointed by the Secretary, to administer it.
 Does it remain government speech even if you don't say, "This is your government speaking"?
 It --
 If you say, you know, "America's cattlemen are speaking," is it government speech?
 It does -- for purposes of this Court's government speech doctrine, it does. And I think --
 Why is that? I mean --
 And the Court -- the Court's decision in Rust, I think, is the best illustration of that.
 Yes, but Rust did not -- Rust was not a case in which the doctor was saying, "This is my personal opinion, not the government's." And here, as Justice Scalia pointed out, there is an affirmative effort to say, "This is -- this is paid for by" whatever it's called, the cattlemen's group or the beef group, which affirmatively indicates that it's not government speech.
 Well, it -- all those statements say -- and there are advertisements in the record that say that the advertising is funded by America's beef producers, which is, of course, accurate, because they --
 Well, it's accurate --
 -- they pay for it.
 -- but it also contains the implication that who -- he who pays is the person whose speech is being broadcasted.
 Well, but, again, in Rust, the doctor who spoke -- I think the patient who went to see the doctor for counseling would have -- would have assumed or believed that the doctor was -- in the immediate encounter, that the doctor was speaking, and yet the Court, in its subsequent cases, has regarded Rust as a situation of government speech. But the important point about what you've just asked is that any concerns about the tag line in the advertising does not go to the constitutionality of the statute or the beef order. Neither the Act nor the order requires that in the advertising. And if the Court was to perceive that as a problem, the right remedy would not be to invalidate the Act, but to, instead, provide that there should be some different identification --
 Yes, but some people --
 -- on the advertising, itself.
 -- may be more resistant to an -- to an ad that says, "Your government wants to eat -- wants you to eat more meat," than they are to an ad which say, "The meat producers would like you to eat more meat."
 Well, I -- and I think in Rust, some people would have been resistant to the idea that your government wants you to engage in family planning, but what the -- what the Court said about Rust was that the government had established a program with a central message about counseling. That was then carried out by private individuals. Here, this case is much stronger than Rust.
 Well, but if you -- if you say the Act can be -- say, because this is just an as-applied challenge, you're asking us to assume that we can put on a label that's not true, "This message is brought to you by your friendly Department of Agriculture." That isn't accurate.
 Well, it would be accurate --
 And you're having us save the statute by just putting a label on it that isn't accurate.
 Well, they're -- I'm sure that a label could be devised that would -- that would be accurate. The -- first of all, they are approved -- specifically approved by the Department of Agriculture. The -- certainly, the Act and regulations provide that the Secretary must approve every contract, every project for advertising. And, beyond that, the USDA approves all advertising, all copy --
 But, Mr. Kneedler --
 -- that is actually to be used, so there is specific approval by the Secretary.
 But there is -- there's another tape put out by the government, on meat, and that -- what is the government speech? Usually, the government has a position, and is presenting it. Here, we have America beef producers has a label on -- "Eat meat." But if you went to the Surgeon General, probably that message would be "Eat meat moderately." So what is the government speech? I don't know another case involving a claim of government speech where the message that you are saying is the government's is not the message that the government is putting out when it's dealing with its concern for public health.
 Well, the government, in the concern -- in situations where it may be concerned about public health, doesn't say, "Don't eat meat." It -- there may be nutritional standards. And USDA does have nutritional standards that it advises people to adhere to. But what the government is doing here is facilitating a situation, facilitating promotion of a commodity. There is a structural defect in a market like -- a market for a fungible commodity, and I think it's important to understand what Congress was responding to here. When you have a fungible commodity, when you have a lot of small producers, no one of those producers has an incentive to advertise --
 Mr. Kneedler, is meat fungible? Or -- I think there are some steak houses that might disagree with that.
 Well, there are -- there are -- there are, to be sure, different cuts of meat, but the -- but the basic --
 I mean, even quality of meat within the -- some is tougher than others.
 Well --
 It's not like milk or wheat.
 But Congress could reasonably determine, under this statute, that there are -- that there are -- that beef has many things in common, that it is a generic problem -- or generic food or generic commodity, and the industry --
 At some level, it certainly is, I suppose. But, just as in wheat or corn, there are different brands and different qualities. But I suppose it's still fungible, in a broad sense.
 It is fungible in --
 May I ask you whether, in deciding the government's speech doctrine, is it the Secretary's formal right to control, as set out in the statute, that we look to, or do we look to the Secretary's actual record of oversight and participation?
 We think the -- we think the formal legal control is sufficient. And it -- the Secretary has the responsibility to approve -- under the statute -- to approve budgets, to approve contracts, and to approve projects. And USDA does, in fact, go beyond that and determine whether particular advertisements will be -- will be issued. But we think it's only necessary to look what the statute requires. But the testimony in this case shows that, in any event, USDA is extensively involved in the development of the advertising under this statute, by extensive consultations with the Operating Committee and the Beef Board in the development of the project. So there -- this is an integrated effort within the Department of Agriculture.
 Is it at all possible to do here what has been done in the union cases, where -- I mean, it's pretty hard for me to believe that there aren't -- that meat -- that cattle growers don't, by and large, like beef. I mean, maybe they have a ideological objection to people eating beef, but I doubt it. They probably object to some content. So can you segregate that? I mean, in the union cases, the bar cases, they try to segregate where there really is an ideological objection from the cases where really all that the objector wants is not to pay the money. And so they work out a system. You know, you pay so much for your dues anyway, you just don't pay that pro rata amount, where you really have an ideological objection.
 Well, I think that --
 Is it possible to work that out?
 What has -- what has been proposed by the -- by the Respondents in this case, of course, is to make it voluntary, so that people --
 Yes, but, I mean, if you make it --
 -- can opt out.
 -- totally voluntary, what you're going to discover is, all of a sudden, the beef people, rather than write a check, will say, "Oh, you know, I make -- I raise cattle, but I don't think people should eat beef."
 Well --
 That saves them the money.
 Well, and I --
 And I tend to doubt that that's their view.
 Well, and --
 Some may view -- object to certain content. So I'm asking if it's feasible to work out --
 I think it -- I think it would not be feasible. It would -- it would enmesh the Department in difficult judgments and time-consuming --
 It would be -- in the union cases, it's hard enough. It's a -- the good-of-the-order exception is the way it works in the union. And in the bar thing, I think it would be hard to --
 Absolutely. And the Court made a similar point in Southworth, where it specifically declined to impose, on the university, a requirement to make judgments that would enable people to opt out in particular cases. And we think that the problem here would be even greater. But they would be particularly great under Respondents' proposal that individuals who don't want to pay, without even having to express an objection, because the whole system would collapse. This is a classic collective-action, free-rider problem.
 Mr. Kneedler --
 What the numbers --
 -- can I come back to Rust versus Sullivan? You say that that was a government speech case? I had not recollected it as a government speech case.
 This Court --
 This is government subsidizing speech by private organizations, and it chose to subsidize one type of speech, but not another.
 Yes --
 Did we say, in the opinion, that this was --
 Not in Rust, but in the Court's subsequent cases, Rosenberger, Southworth -- in particular, in Velazquez -- this Court said that Rust has come to be understood by the Court as a government speech case, because the government prescribed the message, and it's government speech whether or not the government speaks for itself or enlists others to transmit the message.
 Well, for the precise purpose at issue here, I think it makes a lot of difference. You can fund private people for some things, and not fund them for others, and it doesn't make whatever they say government speech. I think that's a --
 But --
 -- I think that's a really --
 -- but there's really no --
 -- strong proposition, that whenever you're subsidizing any private enterprise, the speech of that private enterprise becomes public speech.
 There's really no need to get to that point here, because the Beef Board, which is the entity that does the speaking, is, I think, unquestionably a government body. It's established by special statute under the Lebron test. All of its members are appointed by the --
 That's fine. But what you were using Rust for was to establish the proposition that in order to be government speech, it -- you don't have to -- you don't have to say, "This is the government speaking."
 Well, I think --
 And Rust doesn't stand for that.
 -- Right -- I think, as this Court has come to explain Rust, as being a species of government speech -- but, as I say, there is no need -- there is no need for the Court to get to that situation. And the fact that the government is the one in control of the speech here critically distinguished -- distinguishes this case from cases like Keller and Abood.
 This is a question perhaps more for the Respondent than for you, but I would like your comment on it. Suppose the statute were changed and there was a dollar-a-head assessment on beef, and it just went into the general funds of the United States Treasury, and then they used part of that money -- they had more money for beef advertising, and the government did the advertising. What would the Respondents say about that?
 I think -- I think they would say that that -- that there's something different about general taxes and excise taxes or focus taxes. But I don't think there's any basis in this --
 But why can't --
 -- in history or --
 -- why can't you just do that? Or is your answer to me, "Well, then, it's just formalism, and you might as well rule for me now?"
 I'm sorry, do -- maybe I misunderstood your question.
 Why can't the government --
 Were you asking why focus --
 -- why can't the government adopt my solution?
 Well, I -- and maybe I misunderstood. Was it -- was it paying for it out of general taxes or taking this money and putting into the focus --
 It's put into the general fund of the -- of the Treasury.
 I -- they may say that that's the same thing, but I -- they were drawing a distinction between paying for it out of general funds -- income tax or something -- that we all would pay for. They say that's the solution, rather than having the industry, that benefits from the advertising, pay for it. Not only does the industry benefit --
 But then you'd come within the protections of Frothingham versus Mellon, and Massachusetts versus Mellon, if you did it that way.
 Yes, there would be standing objection -- objections at that point, but we think, in terms of the merits of the argument, the notion that a person would have a First Amendment objection to paying an excise tax because of the uses to which the excise taxes are being put is really extraordinary and finds no basis in cases like Abood and Keller, which have to do with private association -- an association with private speech --
 But then you could --
 -- no government speech.
 -- simply restructure this Act to get to the result you want.
 Yes. If that -- but the funds that are raised are public monies. They don't go in -- they're not deposited in the Treasury. But in the Joint Appendix, there is a reproduced -- an AMS, Agricultural Marketing Service, circular that explains how these public monies -- and calls them "public monies" -- are to be disposed of. And it describes the Beef Board, this governmental body that receives the money, as being the custodian for the Agricultural Marketing Service and handling these monies. And Congress and the Secretary have imposed strict limitations on how those funds can be deposited. So whether they go into the general Treasury or whether they're handled in this way is really a matter of fiscal and revenue and internal governmental policy that I don't think that --
 Mr. Kneedler, this theory is one that wasn't brought up at all in Wileman, if I remember correctly. And in United Foods, it was brought up too late, so the government -- so the Court didn't entertain it. The argument that you're making today, I take it, would necessarily displace United Foods as having any kind of a continuing --
 Yes, because the government did not reach the government speech -- or the Court did not reach the government speech argument in United Foods. And, in fact, United Foods is back, on remand. That was a reversal of summary judgment for the government. It's back, on remand, and is being stayed, pending the outcome of this case on government speech. So there would not be an inconsistent result in --
 You wouldn't want to treat beef and mushrooms inconsistently. [Laughter.]
 Well --
 But there is --
 -- I think --
 -- the public perception of these ads -- it says, "Eat meat" -- it's quite different from saying, "Your government wants you to buy meat." And the United States isn't saying that. So --
 But what the -- what the United States is doing is responding to this classic collective-action problem by establishing a government program to meet the situation where the industry, itself, will -- is unable to conduct the advertising because of -- because of, what I said, the fungibility of the product --
 But then --
 -- and all.
 -- isn't it more realistic to describe this as the government facilitating the private speech of the many people in this industry who don't have a big budget to advertise on --
 I think --
 -- on their own?
 -- doctrinally, it is government speech. It has the -- it has the benefit of enabling the promotion that would have happened in the industry, but for the collective-action problem to occur. But it is government speech under this Court's decision. If I may --
 Do you want to save your time?
 Please.
 Mr. Garre.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The First Amendment does not prevent the government from speaking out in order to revive and expand the market for the nation's most important agricultural product.
 If we can just continue on government speech, because that's where --
 Yes.
 -- where we left off. It seems to me there is something offensive about making a particular portion of the public pay for something that the government says.
 Justice Kennedy --
 It ought to be out of the general fund.
 Justice Kennedy, the assessments in this case are imposed on a class of people who sell particular commodity -- cattle. In that respect, they're no different than the types of assessments the Federal Government has been imposing for centuries on the same of commodities, from the first tax the Federal Government imposed on whiskey to the excise taxes on gasoline producers today. And Respondents concede you could do this out of general tax revenues. They concede that you could have a government speech program funded by excises on certain commodities, like cigarettes or alcohol. There is no basis under the First Amendment to carve out a different rule in the case of beef.
 What I'm saying, it seems to me that the government speech doesn't seem to me to advance your argument very much, because it has problems of its own.
 Well, we agree with the government speech doctrine, although we also think that the Court can uphold the statute under the intermediate-scrutiny analysis. It makes perfect sense for the government to be speaking out in order to correct the market problem that Congress identified in the midst of a two-decades-long depression in the beef industry. Take the BSE incident last year. BSE imposes a potentially catastrophic and overnight impact on the beef industry. In response to that threat, because of the beef checkoff program, the government was able to respond immediately with the funds necessary to respond on a national scale, not only through promotion -- and this is an important part in which this case is different from United Food -- only about half of every checkoff dollar goes to promoting beef through commercial advertising, like the "Beef, it's what's for dinner" campaign. The rest of that dollar goes to things like producing information to consumers about the safety of U.S. meat, the -- addressing the health concerns imposed by BSE and other potential diseases, like E. coli; going to open up foreign markets so that we can export beef -- beef exports have risen dramatically under this program -- and going for things like research in order to identify an early-detection system for BSE. In United Foods, this Court emphasized, at least three times throughout its opinion, that the only aspect of the program that was -- the dollar was being collected for was commercial advertising. And, Justice Stevens, I think you emphasized that in your concurrence, as well. And this program is much more holistic --
 Yes, but, I mean, that -- the part that's good can't save the whole thing, any more than in the -- in the union case, the fact that some -- the union dues could be used for some permissible purposes, saved the dues that were being used for impermissible purposes. You --
 Well, the union --
 You don't want to just save half of this program, do you?
 Well, certainly saving half is better than scuttling the whole --
 Oh, all right.
 -- thing, Justice Scalia. But the union case is -- the speech that was -- that this Court held could not be funded -- and, after all, in those cases, the message was controlled by a non-government entity, the union or the state bar. But there, you're talking about political and ideological speech. Here, we're talking about beef production -- producing --
 Well, what's the objection to, whenever you have an ad, you put a little thing in the corner, and it says, "This advertisement is paid for by the beef industry under a regulation, X-23, of the Department of Agriculture"?
 Justice Breyer, the program would do that if this Court held it was necessary --
 And it wouldn't --
 -- under the First Amendment.
 -- tough, would it?
 But --
 All you'd have to do is have a little thing -- and it would just say, "USDA requires this, under the program," and then the whole problem goes away.
 That's correct. But let me make a few additional --
 All right.
 -- points. First, as Mr. Kneedler emphasized, nothing in the statute, the regulation, requires the ad to say that they're funded by America's beef --
 Well, I -- we realize that. I mean, we're getting into it because there's at least a potential constitutional problem here.
 And let me make another --
 As you respond to Justice Breyer's question, would you go the step further and say, Why isn't one possible solution to this difficulty we're having about government speech a requirement that if you want to justify it as government speech, you put in the advertisement, "This is the government's position, paid for by the beef producers"?
 The government isn't hiding from --
 No --
 -- the messages in its pro-beef ads. It -- Justice Souter, the government could do that, but it's not hiding from this message. We think that if the Court --
 It seems to be. In fact, there was an indication in the brief that the government had taken the position that if the government came out front and said, "Hey, we're urging you to eat more meat," that, in fact, it would be very unsuccessful in doing it. It seems to want to hide the ball here.
 Well, the government does do that, Justice Souter. Last year, during the height of BSE crisis, the President, from his ranch in Texas, urged Americans to eat more beef and told Americans that beef was safe. That's the same message that went out, supervised by the United States Department of Agriculture, through the Beef Board, to communicate --
 Did he --
 -- message.
 And who paid for that? Did these people pay for that?
 The President's message was paid through general tax dollars. The message under this program is paid through the assessment. It's the same message. The message under the Beef Board is carefully controlled and supervised by the United States Department of Agriculture. If I could make a point --
 Well, let's be honest about it. Let's be totally accurate. It's not going to say, "The government believes this." The government may not believe it. What it says is, "This message is brought to you by the Beef Association under the -- under a program requiring contributions to advertising of the Department of Agriculture."
 And --
 Nobody will even know what that means, but it has the -- [Laughter.]
 -- it has --
 Well, that's good.
 -- it has the virtue of being totally accurate.
 That's right. Every single ad that we're aware of, has the beef check, which is the sign that the beef -- or the reasonable observer would know that this is a statute passed by Congress containing a message that Americans should eat more beef, that beef is nutritious, that's disseminated under a program that's carefully supervised and controlled by the Secretary of Agriculture.
 The important thing is, you have no objection to doing that.
 We would not, but we also think -- and if the Court made that clear in this case, it wouldn't be a basis for invalidating the statute; it might be a basis for sending it back or an as-applied challenge. Importantly, we --
 But what it -- what it would -- what it would be a basis for, at least within the confines of this argument, would be a basis for your government speech claim in the sense that you wouldn't be basing a government speech claim on what is really a misrepresentation.
 It -- we don't think it's a misrepresentation. The speech is funded by America's beef producers. The Respondents in this case, the centerpiece of their First Amendment argument --
 No, including those who don't want to fund it and who don't agree with the message. I mean, the problem here is that by making that representation, you indicate that this is the message of the people who are paying for it. And some of the people who are paying for it do not wish to convey that message.
 We --
 That's the misrepresentation.
 With respect, we would disagree. There's no reason to believe that a reasonable observer would think that just because an ad says it's funded by the nation's beef producers, every single one of the 850,000 individual cattle producers in this country agrees with every single statement --
 But what they would --
 -- of the message.
 -- what they would, I think, assume is that, in the name, the beef producers do, in fact, agree with this, and this is their message. What they would not assume from it is that it is what you and Mr. Kneedler are claiming, the speech of the Government of the United States. They certainly wouldn't infer that.
 We think it's fair to assume, as the Court would under the establishment clause, that they're familiar with the act of Congress that makes it its message as well as a program. A critical point on this attribution argument is that it's not supported by any single piece of evidence that Respondents, themselves, have put into the record in this case. Their First Amendment objection is to the content of the ads. There's not a single piece of evidence in the record purporting to make this attribution argument that the public would attribute to the ads to them. It's not in the complaint in this case, it's not in their own affidavits, it's not in the --
 Well, maybe --
 -- in the --
 -- maybe it's not because they didn't know you were going to be defending on the basis of government speech. That's what's getting us into this.
 Well, I highly doubt that, Justice Souter, because the First Amendment claim was added in response to the United Foods case, and this case was developed, from the outset, on a government speech theory.
 Which wasn't a government speech case.
 But it -- the case was tried under the First Amendment, under a government speech argument. But -- so the fact that Respondents didn't put --
 This case, not United Foods. Because United Foods, the Court said it -- it was not legitimately before us.
 That's correct. But my point is that the First Amendment case proceeded after United Foods. The government's central argument in the trial was government speech. The one time attribution came up -- and this is at pages 46 and 47 of the trial record -- Respondents' own witness testified that the public was not likely to attribute the message of the pro-beef ad to its organization of beef producers. So if the Court finds that attribution is a constitutional concern, it's no basis to bring down the act of Congress on the record in this case. The -- I want to emphasize, if I could, that the program in this case has been effective. The record establishes that the beef checkoff has had a statistically significant impact on increasing consumer demand for beef and an increase in prices. That's contained in the expert testimony of Professor Ward, at pages 100 and 173. The record also shows that for every checkoff dollar spent on the program, there's more than a 5.67 rate of return back to the beef producers in the form of increased prices for cattle. The Beef Board's 2003 report suggests -- finds that the price of a fed steer increased by more than $200 in the past few years. This program has worked. Thank you very much.
 Thank you. Mr. Tribe.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: As I was listening to some of the questions about whether it would solve the problem to be more candid and say, "This is your government speaking," I thought I would begin with that question, rather than with an overview of government speech. You'll recall Wooley v. Maynard, of course, in which the State of New Hampshire, without sensing the irony of its position, said, "We'll put you in jail if you do not say, 'Live Free or Die' on" --
 But that was --
 -- "your license plates."
 -- that was an individual attribution. You, yourself, had --
 Yes.
 -- had to carry this message. Now, here you want us to think of some cowboy --
 Well --
 -- going into the bar, and he gets jeered by all his friends because he likes beef.
 Well, Justice Kennedy, my -- [Laughter.]
 -- my point -- my point was going to be that a footnote on the license plate saying, "This is New Hampshire speaking," would not have helped. But one of the central holdings, as I understood it, of United Foods, independent of government speech, was that although there is a difference between having to say something yourself, having to put it on your car, and having to pay for it, that difference does not go to the existence of a First Amendment speech objection -- not an association objection, but a speech objection.
 Let's first address the question you said -- you said you were going to address, whether in order to be government speech, within the meaning of our cases, it has to be identified as such. Is that really true? I mean, you know, in World War II, Bob Hope would appear in movie theaters and say, you know, "Buy war bonds?"
 Yes, I don't --
 "This is Bob Hope. You people ought to go out now" --
 Justice Scalia, I think, although it's an interesting digression about whether the government is being candid, the objection here has nothing to do with that.
 Okay, so it is --
 But being the government --
 -- it is not essential --
 It may be.
 -- that government might -- in order to be government speech, the government does not have to identify itself as the speaker.
 I --
 Yes or no? Yes or no?
 I think the answer is yes, it must identify itself, but it doesn't help, because --
 Well, it doesn't --
 -- the government --
 -- we understand that you have a First Amendment claim, which you're going to have even if we say, "This is not government speech." I think the whole point here is to decide whether this is even --
 No, no, Justice --
 -- an issue that should be disposed of on any grounds other than candor.
 Justice Souter, I think that we're getting off track by assuming that it helps for it to be government speech. My point is that a central theme of this --
 Well, just indulge us. I mean, some of us think it makes --
 Let me --
 -- a difference --
 Well, but --
 -- and I would --
 -- but let me ask you whether --
 -- I would like to know whether it is essential to its character as government speech that the government's say, "This your government speaking."
 It depends on the purpose for which you are acting whether it's government speech. In Rust v. Sullivan, even though I think you're certainly right, Justice Scalia, that in that opinion it wasn't called government speech, in order to rationalize it, in Rosenberger and Velazquez, it was so described. But the question there wasn't, "Can people be made to support it?" The question, rather, was, "Can the government insist on staying within the terms of its grants and saying you can't talk about abortion?" When the question is, "Can the government force you to support it," the "it," if it's government speech, doesn't help. The First Amendment makes it a harder case for them, not easier.
 It does it all the time in general taxes. Every --
 Well --
 -- time we pay general taxes, we're supporting government speech --
 Of course.
 -- we may not agree with.
 But the Court has said there is a fundamental difference between being singled out, as in Wooley, to have a license plate, as in Pruneyard, to have someone on your premises. In Pruneyard, the Court said that one of the reasons it's okay to require someone to allow a private speaker onto the premises is that he was not required to support a government slogan. When it is --
 Yes, but there it --
 -- government speech --
 -- there it is your car, your property. That's not this. This is a generic ad on behalf of beef.
 That was true of --
 I think there is --
 -- that was true of United Foods.
 -- there's a world of difference between this and having something put on your license plate or in your --
 Justice O'Connor, I would be much more offended by having to put it in my license plate. But if I were raising cattle, and I were told, as they were told in this case, "cattle equals beef; that's all it's worth, and that's why we won't let you, in these ads -- we won't let the ads, that you have to pay for, increase the demands for cattle; only beef" --
 Well, I don't even understand your argument. Would you still be if the --
 I haven't made it.
 Well, you're trying. [Laughter.]
 Would you still be here if there were distinctions made on behalf of free-range beef or, you know, "Our cattle" --
 Oh, yes.
 -- "never had a" --
 The most important distinction --
 -- "medicine" or something like that? Would you still be here if those distinctions --
 Well, if it --
 -- had been made?
 -- wasn't generic -- there's no way for them to have an ad for every imaginable different kind of cattle in one set of advertisements. I just think --
 Well, I'm just --
 -- it's a --
 -- asking you if, theoretically, some attention had been paid to the different kinds of producers --
 Right.
 -- would you still be objecting?
 We would object, fundamentally, if they did not emphasize American beef. That was our first objection. They said that they don't want to emphasize American beef, because, in cross-examination, the officer of the Beef Board said, "Consumers might actually have a preference for American beef. That would be irrational. We don't want that." And so all of those cattle ranchers can say that, "We're proud of it being American." They can't get that in there. And the other principal thing is that they don't think of themselves as selling sides of beef. Some of them are selling dairy cattle, some of them are selling -- even if it's going to, in the end, be in the slaughterhouse -- we all die someday -- their fundamental belief is that these are animals, and they're to be cared for. And the reason that that makes a difference -- the reason that it makes a difference that they can't even advertise -- try to make live cattle more attractive to buy -- is that the collective-action problem, if that were relevant here -- I think that was really resolved by United Foods -- but the collective-action problem is really created, not solved, by what they're doing. Because the structure of the market is that there are a few concentrated meat-packers. Something like four slaughter 80 percent of the -- of the cattle in the United States. They have the bargaining power. And in the record, their support for the findings of the District Court, that when the demand for beef goes up through these generic ads saying, "Eat beef" -- although they certainly don't say, "Your government says you should eat beef, beef, beef" -- but when the demand for beef goes up, the profit is pocketed by the meat processor, the meat packer, the restaurant, the supermarket. And these guys still end up taking their cattle to market, and often having to pay a dollar checkoff, even though they can't even get the price of the -- of the cattle back. So --
 But would it --
 -- the free rides are now taken by the people who don't pay --
 -- seems to --
 -- the processors don't pay anything.
 I understand that a person could have an ideological objection to the content of the ad. But the ad, itself, is an effort by government, in this area, to regulate a commercial matter, not a license plate that says, "Free Speech, or Die," or "Freedom" --
 But it regulates speech, Justice Breyer.
 Yes, I know. Right now I'm asking --
 They don't --
 Well, my question is, does it make a difference for the point of distinguishing, or not distinguishing, "Live Free, or Die," and similar ideological matters -- does it make a difference that the fundamental aim of the program, and 99 percent of the way it's carried out, has to do with simple advertising, commercial advertising, the regulation of a commercial matter, commerce --
 Right.
 -- does that make a difference?
 I think it makes an emotional difference.
 But no legal difference.
 Not in the context of forcing people to pay.
 So, in other words --
 It makes a difference --
 -- in other words, a program that is a regulatory program regulating commerce, we should no longer think of that, though we tend to think of it as quite different in the way we approach the First Amendment -- we no longer, in your view, should?
 No, no. I think, certainly if we are regulating economic transactions and only dealing with speech in a purely ancillary way -- that is, we're regulating sale, transactions --
 We regulate advertising. We regulate commercial advertising.
 Right, but the --
 The Federal Trade Commission --
 -- network --
 Yes.
 -- didn't you say that just the fact that you call it commercial speech only means that when you are regulating problems of a transactional kind -- deception, overbearing -- then the fact that it's commercial speech makes a big difference. But you can't just generically say that because something doesn't fit your idea of what's ideological -- I mean, to these ranchers, the ideology --
 I didn't say --
 -- is different --
 -- I didn't say they had a --
 But whose --
 -- commercial objection.
 -- whose line -- whose line between ideology and commerce will --
 I am asking. In analyzing the program, there are some things for it, and there are some things against it. And in trying to make that weighing, I do think it's different, because the basis of the program is commercial regulation. And so I want to be certain, in your view, that's either correct or incorrect.
 I think it's --
 If it's incorrect, I want to know why.
 Well, I think it's -- if one were just weighing and didn't have a structured set of principles on the balance in favor of it, I think, you're right, we can't -- they're not trying to induce ideological conformity. This is not a case where they're trying to enforce what Justice Jackson calls "the unanimity of the graveyard." It is a case where the spirit of the government is in the right place. The government is trying to facilitate collective speech when --
 Well, if it makes a difference, then the lens that I look at this through is called our -- whatever the second-tier commercial speech lends.
 I don't think --
 Have you looked at --
 That doesn't follow. I don't think that follows. It follows that if you were -- if you were writing on a clean slate and were trying to create a wholly new doctrine, one of the things you would look at, I suppose, is that this is not a program designed to create ideological conformity in America. At least the spirit of the program is not that. But the road to hell is often paved with good intentions, and the means, in this case, that was chosen, was not to have the government spend some more money telling people, "Beef isn't all as bad for you as you think." The remedy that they are choosing is to pick a group of ranchers and say to them, "You are the ones who are going to pay, and you are going to pay for" --
 Mr. Tribe, would --
 -- "ads that are in your name."
 -- would you comment on the argument that -- what will this do to compelling cigarette manufacturers to finance the advertisements against smoking?
 Well, by "advertisements against smoking," Justice Stevens, if you mean, "Here are the things that will kill you in cigarettes," the kind of thing that's on the package now, it seems to me that it is constitutional, under even cases like Zauderer, to say that whoever sells a product or a service --
 They have to give warning. But why is the -- why is the cigarette analogy different from this case? What is your answer to that?
 Well, it seems to me that no one suggests that the cigarette companies are supporting the ads in California. California is doing exactly what the Surgeon General does.
 Well, it's odd that you can be compelled to --
 Say negative things --
 -- engage in speech that you don't agree with. Now you're saying that the more --
 Right.
 -- disagreeable it is to you --
 Well --
 -- the more legitimate it is. That's --
 I think if you're --
 -- a very strange argument.
 Well, it may be strange, but I think that there have been stranger things. The reason that it's true is that if you go around doing things that might endanger people, it's entirely justifiable for the state, as part of its non-speech effort to protect people --
 Well, do you --
 -- from harm, to make you give warnings --
 -- do you accept the fact that the government can charge taxes on the sale of cigarettes and compel -- and use that money to tell people that they're dangerous?
 Well, I think that's a much harder case than this, to be honest with you. I think --
 We do, however.
 Well, California does that.
 Is that part of what's going on?
 In California, it does.
 So what you're arguing here --
 Yes.
 -- is going to have rather a drastic effect on --
 Well, I think the --
 -- what's going on.
 -- drastic effect would be the other way, wouldn't it? If this Court were to hold, despite United Foods, that it is permissible to force people to support speech they don't agree with, as long as that speech doesn't fit our sense of what's ideological, that cuts to roll back Keller and Lehnert and Abood. It's not a small part of the constitutional landscape that would be unearthed. Whereas, think about what is the marginal effect of saying --
 Wait, I don't -- I had not understood you to be arguing, Professor Tribe, that this would be unlawful, even if the money were raised in the fashion that it is, just from the -- just from the cattlemen. And the government's own program used that money to say, "Your government thinks it's -- wants you to know that beef is thoroughly safe. We've done studies. Beef is good for you. You should eat more beef." I thought you --
 No, I do think that would be permissible.
 That would be permissible?
 Because, I mean, technically, it would solve only the association problem. They're not associated with the message. They're still forced to support it, but not in any sense different from general taxpayers. And because that's the case, and because it would be an odd formalism to say that it makes a difference whether we segregate that money or not, seems to me it would follow that if the government is willing to pay the political cost of having the speech be perhaps less persuasive because of -- people's discount for what the government says and of having to get an appropriation from the taxpayers -- I mean, taxpayers are smart enough to know --
 No, not that. The same program, but you just have a little tag on the ad.
 Like the lockbox? I mean, every -- I think the taxpayers know that money is fungible. Well, in this case, you mean if you had the program, not from general revenue, but you simply said, on the ad, "This is actually part of a government program"? I don't think that solves any problem, other than deception.
 What's the --
 Deception is the -- my constitutional argument.
 -- what's the difference between the checkoff and the excise tax?
 Well, the checkoff in this case is money that goes to a group, which, though it is organized by the government, purports to represent --
 So the answer is --
 -- the way it structured --
 -- where --
 -- these people.
 -- where the money goes and who pays out the money for the ad, that's the difference.
 Well, the difference is the whole structure. Keep in mind --
 Well, isn't that the -- isn't that the essential difference between the structure in this case and the structure in the case in which the government comes out, saying, "This is your government, saying, 'Don't smoke.'"
 Yes, one -- the difference is that in one case, we've got Congress, we've got the executive, we have one --
 Right.
 -- person, one vote. Here, we have a million --
 I know, but take all that out of it -- take all that out of it, and what is your answer to Justice Stevens and Justice Souter? That is, look, like this, you have an organization, the Federal Trade Commission, say, or that the FDA says, on the one hand, (a) broccoli industry, "Fruits and vegetables are good for you; crib death device, "Buy anti-crib-death devices; "Buy car seats for your children"; or, "Don't smoke"; or --
 Well, I mean --
 -- "Don't buy a crib without a crib-death device" --
 -- I mean, I think it's --
 -- "or a car without a car seat."
 Right.
 See? One's negative and one's positive. And everything else is the same. Then how do you --
 Whether it's --
 -- what's the difference?
 -- negative --
 Yes.
 -- or positive, it's the government --
 Okay, maybe it doesn't matter.
 Well, no, it matters, in this sense. When the government puts out a message and puts its credibility behind the message, likely to have to balance -- it's going to say, "A little broccoli, but a little steak." "Don't risk crib death" --
 But I'm not interested -- I got that point.
 Right.
 I'm not dismissing it. I understand it.
 All right.
 But I'm not sure --
 So I'm not understanding what your question is.
 Well, my question is, is it implied in what you're argued that it would be equally unconstitutional, in the same way, to tell the cigarette industry to advertise, "Don't smoke," or to tell the automobile industry to advertise, "Buy car seats for your children," or to tell the crib industry to advertise, "Be sure you have an anti-crib-death device"?
 I think --
 And all that, assuming the financing is the same as here, everything else the same, is it implicit in your argument that they're all equally unlawful?
 No. My argument is that you can require the seller of any commodity to include warnings. It does not necessarily follow that you can say to an industry, "You're bad guys. We want you to put on an advertising campaign, and the campaign has to have these characteristics." Forcing them to advocate that people not buy their products, I think, is not the same thing --
 Mr. Tribe --
 -- as forcing them to say --
 -- I thought --
 -- that it will be addictive or that it will cause cancer.
 But you're saying --
 -- I thought --
 I want to be sure I -- that I understood your answer. You can compel them to make warnings. Can you compel them to pay for warnings that are just industry-specific, in saying, "This is dangerous" --
 I think so, because I can't see any difference between saying that -- you put on the package, "The Surgeon General has determined that smoking will cause cancer," and saying, "We're going to put on television" --
 But it seems --
 -- "the Surgeon General" --
 -- almost ironic, to me, to say that you have a greater power to tell the whole industry to publish something they don't want to publish than you do to let them --
 But that -- Justice Stevens, what --
 -- pay for what --
 -- what is --
 -- 90 percent of them want to say.
 -- what is the difference between telling them that -- I mean, there may be a critical difference between the point of sale and a generic ad -- that is, the power to regulate the transaction to make sure it's safe, includes the power to include on the package certain warnings. The moment you step back from that and say that, "Because you're in a dangerous business, you have to publish general warnings to the public," maybe that's where the line has to be drawn, because I agree that it would be rather bizarre --
 Are you limiting your point to putting information on the package, or are you saying they could -- could California compel a cigarette -- companies to contribute to a large fund which is just used to by newspaper advertising describing the dangers of smoking? Could they do that?
 Well, I think that the rationale for that would be far stronger than this. The state's power to protect people, in terms of life and health, includes the power to compel --
 Yes, but supposing there are disagreements. We were -- you were talking about cigarettes. But supposing there's a legitimate disagreement between the industry position and the government position --
 Okay.
 -- could the government, nevertheless, insist on the industry financing advertising advocating the government's position?
 Well, not advocating; reporting what the government position is. I mean, the -- when the cigarette company says on the package, "The Surgeon General has found this stuff is deadly," they're not quite saying, "We agree with the Surgeon General." They've -- making them fund or support statements that do not reflect their own beliefs, as though it were --
 So, in this case --
 -- is impermissible.
 -- I take it, it would be okay if the beef producers had to use a dollar a head to put, "Eating too much beef is dangerous to your health."
 Well, if they had -- well, they're not beef producers. I mean, I am troubled by -- they're -- these are cattle.
 All right, cattle, then --
 All right? And then -- and then they're trying, ultimately, to brand us as though we are slicing these things up and selling them.
 But what's the answer to my question?
 If the question is, can retail grocers be required to put on the beef packages they sell, "The government has determined that the cholesterol content is dangerous if you have more than X," I see no reason why that would be harder --
 In other words --
 -- to defend than the cigarette package.
 I think the question, or at least the version I have of it --
 Yes.
 -- is, we have this case, exactly, and the only difference is, instead of getting these people to eat -- say, "Eat beef," what they say do is, they get people together and say, "Don't eat too much beef." I put --
 Well --
 -- "too much," because that --
 Yes.
 -- makes it more realistic. All right, now, does it suddenly become constitutional?
 The program is facially unconstitutional. It is the structure that says to all these people, "You've got to put money into this elaborate structure, which purports to represent you" -- that is, the -- they have all this stuff saying that the Beef Board is related to the industry as board of directors, the shareholders -- "These people, who purport to represent you, will, under the aegis of the government, put out statements at various times." That's facially unconstitutional.
 All right. Consider this theory. The Congress passes an excise tax. It happens to be a dollar head, on the cattle, just like this so-called "checkoff." And the government uses the excise tax revenue to finance advertising, saying -- maybe saying, "Eat more beef," maybe advertising, saying, "Don't eat quite so much."
 Or maybe --
 First Amendment problem --
 -- talking about the war in Iraq. No, I think that once your taxes enter the general fund, a pretense that it's --
 Including excise?
 Well, I don't think excise taxes are segregated in any way that makes -- that makes it harder --
 No, I just want to know what --
 -- than Social Security.
 -- your position is. I just want to know what your position is.
 My position is that once the revenue is part of the government's general fund, the government's subject to doctrines that I don't think are First Amendment doctrines about government propaganda -- there may be limits on the government's ability --
 Okay, then --
 -- to defend it.
 He's just going back to --
 Subject to that --
 Okay, then it does not have --
 -- it's not a First Amendment problem.
 -- it's not a First Amendment problem. It does not have the objection that you're raising.
 That's correct.
 Okay.
 Is that -- is that an answer to the question that Justice Kennedy urged in the opening argument? That is, it's the same dollar a head, except you call it an excise tax instead of a -- whatever this is called. The same thing, but to say it's a tax. And you're not -- this is not general revenues that you collect from everybody and spend --
 If the structure is they take the money from you and put it in this elaborate machinery which comes out with statements you're forced to support, the statements that don't have behind them the accountability checks of the Federal Government, which has to answer to taxpayers and answer to the public for the stuff it puts out -- that is -- if that's what it is, it doesn't matter what you call it, it remains unconstitutional. It remains unconstitutional because these individuals are forced in a way that taxpayers are not -- forced to be part of a system in which, even if you have footnotes saying, "This is pursuant to the government," a system in which they will be generally understood in just the way Justice Breyer said, "Well, you know, we assume" --
 But suppose --
 -- that these people --
 -- we don't have that? I mean, could then -- could the government fix this problem this way, saying, "We're going to get the same bucks, but we are going -- and we're going to have the same kinds of ads, but they're going to be labeled, 'U.S. Department of Agriculture."
 And we're going to eliminate the cattlemen's Beef Board and all of these things --
 Yes.
 -- that are supposed to represent you --
 But we are -- but where this money is coming from to pay this is --
 I would be happy to represent the cattlemen in that circumstance, saying, "You still have not an associational right, but a right not to be singled out to support government speech." But it would be a different and more difficult claim. One. Two, this Court doesn't have before it the possibility of rewriting all of this. Three, there was a severability provision in an earlier version of the law suggesting that maybe if you could lop something off, it would be okay. But that was eliminated in the current law. And, finally, any attempts to analogize this to the cases like Lehnert and Keller, in terms of remedy, that maybe we can create some scheme where only the objectionable part is returned, is fundamentally incoherent, because what is objectionable here is homogenizing all of these people into some one message, and putting it out through this elaborate structure that purports to represent them.
 May I go back to one of your reasons, which was that they are being singled out to pay for this? They're being singled out to pay for it in the excise tax situation. Do you come to different answers, depending whether it's excise tax or singled out without excise tax, based, essentially, on the ground that there is a point beyond which we simply cannot look behind the expenditure of tax revenue? Is that it?
 I think that there's a point beyond which, for institutional reasons, it would be very problematic for a courts to say that you could trace the dollars into the treasury and those institutional reasons would be, I think, an instance of under-enforcement of a constitutional norm, because the underlying constitutional principle that you ought not to be able, by some gimmick, to get some people to support speech they don't believe in, that would be there. But the difficulty of having this Court enforce that principle, I think, would be very real. But no such difficulty, I think, is presented in a case like this one, because if this case came out their way because of government speech, of course, United Foods would be obliterated, but a good deal more would be obliterated, because the theory would have to be that because it's not on your license plate, because you don't have to carry it, you're only supporting it, then that's all the difference in the world. Because, otherwise, its being government speech would make it worse. But if it's all the difference in the world whether you have to carry or utter it, or merely support it, then all of the decisions of this Court carefully protecting the rights of dissenters in every imaginable kind of organization, from the powerful overriding theory that collective-action problems mean that we've really got to get more speech over here than you are willing, yourselves, to engage in --
 Yes, but on the other hand --
 -- you'd be --
 -- you're running into the problem that the taxpayer can be compelled to pay taxes to support activities that he doesn't support at all. That's the other --
 Well, we do that all the time.
 -- the other extreme. I know we --
 We do that all --
 -- do it all the time.
 -- the time.
 And when are we crossing --
 That's the --
 -- the line?
 -- that's why we have elections, in part.
 Pardon me?
 Right? We have elections, in part, because the only way -- there's no way to protect every individual's right to have the government's collective policy suit his or her fancy. I mean, that way --
 But it is --
 -- would allow complete chaos.
 -- inconsistent with the basic principle on which you rely, that the individual should not be compelled to support speech --
 Well --
 -- with which he disagrees.
 -- to support -- supporting speech is somewhat different from supporting activities that you don't agree with. I mean, the First Amendment makes a fundamental difference in that respect.
 But isn't --
 If there were --
 -- isn't that --
 I'm sorry.
 Don't you go back to the answer you gave me? Sure, when taxes are involved, there may be an under-inclusive enforcement of certain individual rights, but they have to be under-enforced, because, otherwise, you simply cannot administer a tax structure.
 Or any structure. I mean, Bowen v. Roy -- I mean, there's a sympathetic case of the man who did not want Little Bird of the Snow to be given a Social Security number. But we could, when we, interactive with the government, say to him, "You -- we can't make you give the number to get the food for your little daughter," but if one person says, "I don't want numbers in your computers," and the other says, "I don't want letters, I want only numbers," the fact that every individual who has a potential claim on a collective choice could pull in a different direction means we can't run a system that way. But no such problem is presented in cases like this.
 Thank you, Mr. Tribe.
 Thank you.
 I think we understand your position. Thank you. Mr. Kneedler, you have about three -- three or four minutes.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens. Mr. Tribe has conceded that if this program were financed by a system of excise taxes that went into the general Treasury, and Congress then paid -- provided the exact same amount of money to produce the exact same ads, that there would be no constitutional problem. And, in our view, the First Amendment simply does not regulate the details of government fundraising, the details of government accounting, and the details of government bookkeeping in that manner. The First Amendment is --
 But that goes back to Frothingham and Mellon, and Massachusetts versus Mellon, and United States versus Butler, where we could trace the amount.
 Right, and --
 It's old stuff.
 Right, and the Court -- the Court superceded those decisions in cases like Carmichael Coal and Storaasli Company and cases like that, where the Court said excise taxes can be imposed. As long as there is a public welfare justification, they can be spent. And it would be an odd result to have the First Amendment drive the way the government arranges a system like this. After all -- and Professor Tribe said it would be different if the cattlemen's Beef Board were gotten rid of. It actually -- the principal point here is the Secretary controls the speech. Whatever the cattlemen's Beef Board does -- and that is a government entity -- the Secretary controls the speech. So that -- this is not some jury-rigged system; this is a system of governmental control. Congress has prescribed the message, and the Secretary carries it out. It's important to recall that many federal excise taxes go into dedicated trust funds -- for highways, for other functions like that. And out of that dedicated trust fund, there may be money expended on highway safety. So the fact that it's dedicated really should not matter. And this case is completely different from cases like Keller. In Keller, the state bar was not appointed by the -- by the government, there was no governmental supervision of what it did, and the government certainly did not approve the messages in favor of nuclear freezes, et cetera. This is different in all the critical ways that make this a program of government speech. And, as Justice O'Connor pointed out, to strike down this program would have drastic consequences. There are many, many agricultural promotion programs like this. There are 13 at the national level. This program has been in existence since 1988. One billion dollars has been collected, and promotions have been conducted under it. These promotional programs go back to the '50s, and even -- and even earlier. And there are many programs on the state levels, as the amicus brief filed by the states in this case shows. This Court would be striking down a lot to hold that this commonsense way of approaching things is unconstitutional. It's also important to recognize that the ultimate beneficiary of the advertising is the consumer. Yes, it affects the industry, but it's the consumer. And the very first finding that Congress made in the Beef Act is, beef and beef products are basic foods that are a valuable part of the human diet. When the -- when the -- because of the collective-action problem in this industry, that it cannot organize to advertise, that basic message is not getting to consumers. So this -- the justifications for this, to the extent one thinks of it in terms of the commercial speech, it is squarely within the ultimate purposes of the commerce speech doctrine, which is to correctly market failure with respect to advertising in order to get information to consumers.
 Thank you, Mr. Kneedler. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument now in American Trucking Associations v. Michigan Public Service Commission and a companion case. Mr. Digges.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: This case is a challenge to Michigan's $100 per truck flat annual fee that is imposed on all trucks that are registered to do point-to-point operations in the State of Michigan. We submit that this fee, this flat per truck fee, has the same impermissible effects on interstate commerce as the two flat truck fees that were struck down by this Court in American Trucking Associations v. Scheiner. In the American Trucking Associations v. Scheiner case, this Court looked at the practical effect of these fees and found that because of their unapportioned structure, that the fees had four interrelated types of impermissible effects on interstate commerce. First, the Court found that these kinds of flat fees were a financial barrier against out-of-state motor carriers even coming into the State that imposed the -- the fee. There's no question in this case that the Michigan flat fee has the same kind of protectionist quality.
 Well, it -- it does for trucks that want to deliver things within the State of Michigan. It doesn't for anybody else.
 Yes, it -- it discriminates and it -- it has an exclusory effect on trucks -- out-of-state carriers that want to compete in the -- and bring their trucks across the -- the border of Michigan and compete against local carriers for intrastate hauls.
 It would have that -- it certainly has that tendency. Do we have -- do we know in fact what the effect is? Is it deterring anybody? How many trucks does it affect?
 There was not a trial below. So we don't have that fact. We believe that as in the Scheiner case, these -- these tendencies are inherent there. Because of the structure of the fee, it not only has this effect, it has what this Court called a hydraulic pressure effect, and that is to -- for carriers, once they have paid this fee as an entrance fee, to pull their trucks out of interstate commerce and to concentrate them into -- in the State of Michigan in the local activities. And that -- in fact, the State acknowledges that. Below, the State said that motor carriers should allocate or dedicate their trucks to the State of Michigan in order to avoid these consequences. And even the Michigan Court of Appeals recognized that, saying a local carrier would be discouraged from operating in interstate commerce.
 Of course, it also -- I mean, you say it -- it favors the in-state -- intrastate carrier because if you're doing nothing but intrastate carriage, you -- you amortize the $100 over many more miles, whereas the interstate carrier, much of whose business is out-of-state, doesn't do that. On the other hand, you can certainly argue that -- that this tax discriminates against intrastate carriers in -- in another respect, that is to say, interstate carriers who -- who do nothing within the State do not pay it, whereas the -- the Michigan carrier that does a lot of interstate business but if he does one piece of intrastate business -- interstate business, he still pays it. Isn't that right?
 Well, Your Honor, I think what -- what that's saying -- and I know that was the argument made in the Solicitor General's brief -- is that you can discriminate against one component of interstate commerce, those carriers that want to actually compete and do intrastate business in the State, as long as you give a benefit to another component of interstate commerce, those who just wish to operate in the -- in the State of Michigan in interstate commerce.
 Well, it's not so much that you necessarily can do it, but it -- it sort of interrupts the -- the kind of the a priori reasoning and you're thrown back on a -- on -- on a practical effects analysis under Pike.
 No, Your Honor. I think what happens is that -- that there are the segment of carriers that would like to compete against intrastate carriers. The fact that other carriers may be getting a break in terms of regulatory fees -- and we don't know that to be the truth, getting the other interstate carriers. It's the Boston Stock Exchange, and I think it was said again in the Scheiner case that -- that you can't discriminate among interstate carriers. And as we pointed out in our brief, you could set up a situation in which a -- a State discriminated in favor of interstate carriers in situations or industries where their locals had no interest in competing, but where their -- their locals were interested in competing, they could set up a discriminatory system. So you can protect timber industry in -- in Oregon and --
 But may I ask this question? Suppose you have an interstate carrier that does 100,000 miles of business in Michigan and you have an intrastate carrier that does a 100,000 miles of business in Michigan. They both say the -- pay the same tax, don't they?
 If they each do 100,000 miles of intrastate business in Michigan --
 Yes.
 -- they would pay the same flat fee.
 They would both pay the same tax, both the intra and the interstate. Now, that doesn't sound to me like discrimination against either one.
 If -- if this -- if this tax was apportioned based on mileage, it would not be discrimination, but unfortunately, it is not and --
 No, but I'm just saying if the intrastate and interstate carriers both have the same intrastate mileage, they both pay the same tax.
 And we -- we would -- and again, if this was a mileage-apportioned fee, it would be -- it would be fine. But the fact is as in Scheiner, the out-of-state carriers, because the interstate carrier is -- is operating --
 Yes, but you might have an intrastate carrier that does a smaller amount of mileage, only 50,000 miles, and an interstate carrier that pays -- does 100,000 miles. They both pay the same tax too. And everybody is treated alike on their intrastate business.
 That would be true but that --
 And the tax only operates on intrastate business.
 The factual situation is going to be that the interstate carrier is just not going to have the opportunity to do as much business in Michigan as the intrastate carrier.
 Well, it seems to me you should have introduced some evidence on that point. I mean, it -- it really is an assumption of your unfairness argument that purely intrastate carriers do significantly more intrastate business than interstate carriers who choose to do some interstate business. Now, does that strike you as self-evident? It does not need any --
 Yes. Yes, Your Honor.
 -- demonstration?
 It does strike me as self-evident. In fact, to courts below -- we have -- we've made this argument. We've seen this argument now. The cases have called it intuitively obvious. And from the discussion of -- in the Scheiner case and from the discussion in the Nippert case, the very difference between interstate and intrastate commerce means that on average the interstate carrier is just not going to use the State's facilities as much as the in-state carrier.
 Wouldn't we be better able to decide this question after a trial rather than speculation on both sides?
 I don't think a trial is necessary because, as I say, this -- this Court quoted Justice Frankfurter clearly, and I think the Solicitor General in his brief says that on average the out-of-state carrier is not going to get as much benefit from this fee. This is a variable cost fee. In effect, the out-of-state carrier is having to pay more than its fair share of the cost of the -- of the State's regulatory system. And again, that's something that was accepted in the Scheiner case, accepted in -- in the Nippert case. And the intrastate carrier -- every time that it operates in the State, it is using that privilege.
 Well, Nippert was over 100 years ago, wasn't it?
 I think the Nippert case was from the 1940's I believe. In any event, as we've been discussing --
 It seems like 100 years ago. (Laughter.)
 It's --
 Mr. Digges, this -- the -- the -- there was a question about the ramifications of the position that you're presenting. That is, there are many situations in which there is some kind of licensing fee that is imposed on everyone, the same dollar amount, although some people who are licensed will be doing business in other States and have to get licenses there as well. The example that was featured in the -- in the briefs on the other side of the lawyer who is licensed, say, in Massachusetts and also in D.C. does not get any break on his D.C. Bar admission because he is also admitted in Massachusetts, and in fact, does most of his practice out-of-state, out of the District.
 Yes, Your Honor. I know that -- that example was given. I think there are a variety of flat fees that would be unaffected by this. There are fees that would be administrative charges and -- and if all the State is doing is charging, for example, the cost of a background investigation or the cost of a truck inspection, a fixed cost, then it's fair to ask the carrier to pay a fixed fee or to ask the taxpayer to pay a fixed fee. With respect to the bar fees, they are obviously different than the trucking industry and -- and the taxation of an instrumentality in interstate commerce. But we think that there may be impracticalities in apportioning a bar fee. You could have an attorney in his office in Virginia that is working for a California customer or California client that is being -- for a case that is being tried in the court system of Oregon, and then for transaction work, he could be working for a customer or a client in -- in Missouri for -- a multi-state. So it may be difficult to apportion fees. We haven't really examined that. But we know from this Court's decisions that -- that is easy and can be apportioned for truck fees, and truck fees -- this Court said in Scheiner that the technology is now available to look at the extent of the activity and the taxpayer in -- in -- of the truck in the State, and later on in a subsequent decision said that you can easily track large physical objects over States. So you can apportion these fees on trucks to their mileage in the State, to their loads, to the gross revenue associated with the --
 The Scheiner case didn't make a distinction based on in-state activity. I thought that that -- that flat fee was applicable to every motor carrier that went on the roads in Pennsylvania.
 That is accurate, Your Honor, but -- but nominally Scheiner -- for instance, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in the Scheiner case did say that -- did uphold the fee because they said only Pennsylvania could charge for the privilege of using Pennsylvania's highways. So like a lot of -- like all interstate commerce, you can always -- as -- as the Court said in Nippert, you can always find -- carve out a local activity to say that this is going to be the focus of the tax. I think a problem here is with the -- the approach taken by the State and the Solicitor General is they suggest that you go back to the days in which you're trying to draw a line between interstate and intrastate activity, this time not because the intrastate activity is going to be immune from the tax, but this time because you're going to have some separate, different kind of test applicable to something that clearly is subject to Commerce Clause protections, but is -- is, in their view, subject to a more lenient Commerce Clause protection. And I don't think this Court wants to retreat back to the days of having to draw a line between interstate and intrastate commerce and -- and then having separate tests. If there are no more questions, I'd like to reserve the rest of my time for rebuttal. Thank you.
 Very well, Mr. Digges. Mr. Hanson.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: In contrast to the ATA case, the question before the Court today in the Mid-Con case is whether the fee on vehicles operating solely in interstate commerce is preempted by 49 U.S.C., section 14504.
 It's the same fee we're talking about.
 It is --
 But a different theory of invalidity.
 It is not the same fee. The -- the fee under subsection (1) that ATA is arguing about is an intrastate fee charged only to --
 Intrastate.
 -- carriers that engage in intrastate activities.
 Okay, and yours is the interstate fee.
 The subsection (2) fee under 478.1 --
 And your fee applies to all Michigan-plated vehicles. Am I correct about that?
 That are operating solely in interstate commerce.
 Yes.
 Do -- do I understand that the two distinctions in what is done with the -- or the way the fee is collected and what's done with it is that the -- the fee is charged against the -- is it the operator as opposed to the owner, if there is a distinction? Is -- is that correct?
 All of the fees under subsections (1) and (2) are charged against the motor carrier --
 The carrier.
 -- or --
 That's the term I should use.
 -- motor carrier, not to the owner.
 Which may not be the owner. And number two, as I understand it, as distinct from the registration fee, this fee goes to a different State department. Is that right?
 That's correct.
 Now, let -- that's -- that's a premise for a question I want to ask you, and the question is in economic effect, is there any difference really between charging this $100 fee with those differences from the registration fee and simply jacking up the registration fee by $100? Would there -- would there be any economic difference to the -- to the public or -- or indeed even to the carriers if they simply jacked up the -- the registration fee by $100? Because the -- the registration fee is passed on to the carrier, if it's not the owner, and the carrier -- it doesn't make any difference to the carrier whether the -- whether the State diverts the $100 up front or -- or divides the -- the registration fee after it's paid. So is there any economic difference?
 Yes, there is and the reason why there is a difference is that the -- the fees that are paid for plating are under the -- under the International Reciprocity Plan, the registration plan, the IRP. And that is an apportioned fee. It is charged to all vehicles, all commercial motor vehicles, regardless of whether it's for-hire or private, regardless of it's in-state or -- of interstate. So everybody pays their apportioned amount based on mileage.
 No, but that shows -- that -- maybe I don't understand. That -- that tells us what happens to the money after it's paid, but it doesn't make any difference to the person who is paying the money, does it?
 Yes, it does.
 Except that he only has to pay in one place, and -- and if they --
 He pays --
 -- increase the registration fee, he'd only have to pay in one place, once.
 But he would only pay the fee based on his mileage in the State. It is not a flat fee if it is put onto the IRP fees. Those --
 Who -- who sets the fee for the plating?
 The -- the State does. It is administered by the Michigan Secretary of State --
 So --
 -- but I believe all of those are statutory fees.
 -- you could have -- unlike the -- the fee, the $10 fee, that --
 The SSRS.
 -- the Federal cap, this would -- for plating it could be anything each individual State chooses it to be?
 In terms of the plating fee?
 Yes.
 Each State is free to charge its -- its own amount as the plating fee.
 Sure, but it -- so -- so regardless of what Michigan does with the apportioned amounts, the amount it charges to the -- to the owner, in the case of the -- the plating fee, is -- is simply set by the State of Michigan.
 That is --
 Yes.
 -- that is correct.
 So what -- and -- and the -- the virtue of the apportionment is that the -- that the owner or the -- or the owner, I guess in this case, does not have to pay fees in 49 other States.
 That is correct.
 But he doesn't -- it doesn't matter to -- that's the value to him. It doesn't matter to him how they apportion whatever that fee is that Michigan charges.
 If they apportion it, however, it is -- it is not -- it does not -- if they put it into the IRP, it is not part of the registration process. The thing that the --
 But who -- I mean, is -- that's -- that's fine as a matter of administration, but in terms of the -- the end effect on the person who has to pay it and on the consumers to whom it is ultimately passed on, what difference does it make?
 Well, the -- the difference for the person who is paying it under IRP is that if only 20 percent of their interstate miles as a solely interstate operating carrier, if only 20 percent are in the State, they would, in fact, only pay $20 per vehicle.
 Can I ask a quick question? The -- there are three things. Were -- were you finished?
 No, I don't think he -- I didn't --
 Sorry.
 I don't understand your answer. If you were finished, I don't understand.
 Okay.
 If it's -- if it is put into a plating charge as opposed to a registration -- part of the registration of a carrier for the privilege or the opportunity to carry on interstate trucking activities in the State of Michigan, that is the flat fee that we're talking about. Under the SSRS we believe that $100 charge exceeds the $10 maximum and is therefore preempted. If they put it into the IRP, that -- IRP is charged against the owner of the vehicle, paid against the Secretary of -- paid to the Secretary of State. It is not a qualification under -- for the privilege of engaging in interstate trucking in the State of Michigan. The SSRS sets up the standards by which a carrier becomes qualified to operate in the State. Michigan exceeds those standards. If you put those fees into the IRP fees, then the carrier -- or then the owner of the vehicle pays only the proportionate amount based on his mileage in the State.
 May I ask this question? Supposing the -- Michigan changed its system and said we're going to charge you $90 for -- as a plating fee. We're only talking about vehicles that are plated in Michigan. We're going to charge you $90 for a plating fee and now we're going to take 10 -- what used to part of the $100 and another $10 registration fee. Would that be permissible?
 It would be permissible because the -- if the $10 is charged to the carrier as part of the registration process, in order to be qualified to engage in interstate trucking. The $90 would be charged to the owner of the vehicle and would be paid on an apportioned basis under IRP.
 Okay. What if he said $20 instead of $10?
 If he said $20 was going to be put towards the -- the State instead of -- instead of $100?
 Yes.
 And $80 towards IRP?
 Yes.
 In that case, that would still violate the -- the SSRS, if it is done as part of the registration process, which is what Michigan does. Michigan -- even though you're properly SSRS registered, Michigan still requires, under its SSRS form -- it directs the carrier to specifically identify vehicles by make, model, and serial number to obtain a decal by paying $100 for that fee. If they pay $20, that exceeds the $10 maximum that Congress set up in the SSRS in order to be qualified to operate in interstate trucking in the State of Michigan, as an interstate carrier in -- in Michigan.
 But that -- that assumes it's an SSRS charge, and the State denies that it -- it has anything to do with SSRS. Don't you have to establish that it's part of the SSRS program?
 I think what you have to do is you have to look at what the -- the standards do. The -- the registration standards in the SSRS are set up as the process by which a carrier has the privilege to enter into interstate trucking activities in Michigan. When you look at the statute --
 Okay, but what -- what if the State says, you can enter -- enter into interstate activities for nothing? We're simply going to increase the registration fee by $100. Couldn't the State do that?
 The State could do that and that would be perfectly permissible.
 So this is pure formalism.
 It is not pure form. Any -- what -- what Congress did was say that in order to qualify a carrier -- they were concerned about the burdens. When ISTEA was enacted in 1991, they were concerned about the burdens on carriers of individual State registration requirements. And they sought to -- to alleviate that by making it so that carriers could only -- would only have to register in one State so they could do business in all States on an interstate basis.
 Maybe they sought to but maybe they didn't succeed. As I read the statute, it -- it really applies to the -- the limitation of $10 only to those fees that are SSRS fees, and these are not. So maybe there's -- there's a hole in the Federal statute.
 And I don't believe that's the case, Justice Scalia.
 You're trying to make the Federal statute work sensibly, but --
 Right.
 -- I hate to tell you, but not all statutes work sensibly.
 Right. I think what you have to do, though, is go back and look at what Michigan does. Michigan has a -- a State statute, 478.7(1), that says in order to operate to carry property on an interstate basis in Michigan, you must register with the PSC and you must pay the required vehicle fees. The registration standards are what they do as in accordance with SSRS: insurance, service of process, and operating authority. Then you have to pay a fee, and the fee is limited to $10 per vehicle. In the case of Michigan, those vehicle fees are set forth in two different sections of the statutes. One is .7(4), which is the $10 SSRS fee. The other one is subsection -- it's 2(2). That fee is $100 --
 Thank you, Mr. Hanson.
 -- in order for a Michigan-plated vehicle to engage in interstate commerce.
 Your time is expired.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Boynton, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: The petitioner, American Trucking, began its reply brief with the claim that the central reality in this case is that the Michigan intrastate fee places significant burdens on interstate commerce. The Michigan Court of Appeals rejected this claim squarely, saying that as a matter of -- that that was a matter of pure speculation. There's no evidence in the record before this Court that the trucking companies' route choices are affected by the intrastate fee. Furthermore, there is no evidence in the record that the intrastate fee keeps anyone out from engaging in intrastate trucking in Michigan.
 It sure does make sense to me, though. Surely it's the case that a company that does nothing but intrastate Michigan business will, by and large, log in many more miles intrastate than a company which does interstate business but part of its business is intrastate Michigan business. I -- I just -- it seems to me obvious that --
 Well, the Michigan Court of Appeals said that that very well may be the case, but they pointed to the fact that there were no facts to support that finding. And this is completely different than in Scheiner. In Scheiner you had a -- a trial, you had evidence before the court. This Court noted that the -- the cost to an interstate trucker in that situation was five times greater than the cost to a trucker that was in Pennsylvania. You just simply don't have those facts here. What you have is a discrete or a distinct local activity that is something that doesn't affect the interstate commerce.
 It -- it's the case that a company that does only intrastate Michigan business logs all of its miles on -- in Michigan. Right? No miles outside of Michigan.
 That's right.
 And it seems to me it's obvious that a -- a company that does interstate business does not log all of its miles in -- in Michigan, and likely -- likely -- very likely does -- does less miles in Michigan than -- than a purely intrastate Michigan trucker.
 Well, Justice Scalia, that very well may be true, but we don't have any way of -- of qualifying or quantifying the burden here because we don't have those facts.
 Is it difficult to apportion the intrastate fee based on the number of miles traveled intrastate?
 Well, Your Honor, I -- I think it is very difficult to do that. As the United States noted in its brief, they didn't think that mileage would be appropriate because this -- this fee doesn't support the maintenance of the highways. What this fee does is allows trucking companies or allows that truck to operate that truck in intrastate business. So mileage isn't appropriate. Our position is that mileage isn't appropriate because it's next to impossible to try and figure out. What do you compare it to? Do you -- do you compare it to interstate miles? Do you compare it to a ratio of interstate -- intrastate to interstate? And if you do that, how -- how can you come up with a accurate picture of, you know, what the value of that license is in Michigan? It may be --
 Does it make any difference how high the -- the fee is set? If it were $10,000 a truck, does that raise any concerns that are different?
 Well, Your Honor, the Michigan Court of Appeals had taken the position that this was a fee, not a tax, and under a fee -- if -- if a fee was $10,000, if the expenses matched the -- the revenue from it, well, then it -- it would be a -- could be sustained as a fee. Now, if were a tax --
 You -- you defend that position, that -- that it doesn't violate the Commerce Clause so long as it's a fee not a tax?
 Your Honor, we think that the -- if it's a fee and not a tax, the Michigan Court of Appeals applied the correct standard, and that was the standard of Pike v. Bruce Church. And you would look to the -- whether the statute regulated even-handedly, whether it affected a legitimate local --
 Whenever it's a fee, not a tax, you immediately go to Pike Church.
 I think that -- that that was what the Michigan Court of Appeals --
 I know. I know that's what they said.
 Yes, and I -- I think that's a --
 I found it very strange.
 I think that's an appropriate manner in dealing with it. But if you -- if you look at the Michigan Court of Appeals opinion --
 What makes it a fee instead of a tax other than the court saying so?
 Well, first of all, it provided a direct benefit to the intrastate truckers. They were able to operate in the State of Michigan. Second of all, they pointed out that it was in relation to the services granted, being able to do that, and then the third component would be the voluntariness, whether they could agree to -- they didn't have to engage in intrastate trucking --
 You could say the same about a tax. You could say, you know, you only have to pay this tax if you operate in Michigan. You don't want to operate; you don't have to pay it. And you could also say unless you pay the tax, you cannot operate in Michigan. Does that make it a tax or a fee?
 Well, I think in the Michigan Court of Appeals opinion, it -- it was a fee, and I think -- I think what we come back to, Your Honor, is the idea is there a specific class of individuals or businesses that are benefitted. And I think that that's the distinction between a fee and tax. Also, a tax is a general revenue-raising measure, whereas a fee is not. And that's another distinction of -- of a tax. And indeed, this Court -- in National Cable Industry v. the United States, which we cited in our brief, this Court said as whether an exaction is a tax or a fee depends on whether its purpose is to raise revenue or regulate an industry or services. One of the things --
 I'd like to get back just for a moment --
 Yes, Your Honor.
 -- to the answer you gave about apportionment because I wasn't quite sure I understood the answer. You said, well, apportionment is very difficult. What are you supposed to do? What are you -- what's the base? Well, and you said, should we apportion against -- between in-state and out-of-state, and I would think the answer is yes. That's the whole point.
 Well --
 And if we're talking about mileage here, maybe this is something that's eminently susceptible of apportionment. Now, it may be that administratively this is just too expensive. That may be -- that may be a very valid argument. But so far as saying that there's no basis for apportionment, I didn't understand your answer.
 Well, I -- I -- maybe I misspoke myself. What I really meant to say was it would be very difficult to do. And in our joint appendix -- in the joint appendix --
 It would be difficult to do administratively. But -- just because of the cost of collecting all the --
 Well, Your Honor, I think that you got to look at what's the total cost here. The cost is not only to the administrative aspect by the State, but this imposes another cost on the truckers.
 That -- that -- I agree that that is expensive. However, it seems to me that it would be easier to do it with trucks which have miles than with --
 But, Your Honor, the problem is --
 -- than with, say, attorneys or accountants or whatever.
 Your Honor, the problem with that is that this fee, this intrastate fee, does not go to maintain the highways as it was in Scheiner. They make the argument that it's very easy that the mechanism -- they, being American Trucking, makes the argument that it's very easy to just start logging up the miles and -- and you have the mechanism there. But the difference between Scheiner and this case is that in Scheiner you were measuring all intrastate miles, any miles traveled within that State. And there's a mechanism available administratively to do that. The IRP requires that. But here you're not logging all intrastate miles. You're only logging those miles in the State that involve a point-to-point delivery, from one intrastate point to another. So you don't -- you'd have to get a whole new record keeping or you'd have to keep track of a while different set of miles than you would with respect to the IRP. And that's the thing that I find striking about this, that the American Trucking Association is basically saying to its members that they want to have them do more record keeping on their part.
 But the American Trucking Association is -- is willing to be thrown into the -- into the briar bush apparently. It certainly involves no -- no difficulty for your Michigan intrastate truckers. All of their miles are intrastate. And the plaintiffs here say we're -- we're willing to -- you know, to provide figures showing how much of our carriage was -- was exclusively intrastate if you want to apportion.
 Well, that may be, Your Honor, but the -- the point is -- what we're dealing with is a -- a fee that has revenues of about $3 million. And if you have additional record keeping, how much of that $3 million is going to have to be devoted to paying for the administrative costs that are involved?
 May I ask this question? Is the fee payable before the -- a carrier may engage in business or is it after the carrier has paid? Is it -- is it like a tax that's paid after the year is out?
 It's paid before. They -- they have to have --
 If you had to pay it before, there would be no way to calculate it ahead of time because nobody would have had any mileage. Isn't that correct?
 I'm sorry.
 If you have to pay it before the year begins and before you're allowed to engage in the business, you would have no way of measuring the number of miles you're going to travel during the -- the ensuing year.
 That's correct. You would have to have --
 Well, I suppose that's the same thing for the $10 fee for the whatever the acronym is there. That's paid at the beginning of the year, isn't it? And it has to be apportioned among the States. And you don't know how to apportion it at the beginning of the year.
 Now, you're talking about the interstate fee, Your Honor.
 Right, right. But I'm saying the same problem arises when you do any apportioning.
 Well, it -- let me back up. The reason I asked with you -- when you were referring to the $10 fee is because the intrastate fee -- we have a $10 component in that as well. You can obtain a temporary fee for $10 for 72 hours to conduct an intrastate operation. So the statute in -- structurally has some apportionment factor in it. So you don't have to necessarily buy the $100 intrastate fee decal to conduct intrastate operations.
 It's like a 3-day fishing license.
 I suppose that would be one way --
 How -- how does that work in -- in practice? Is it easily accessible? Suppose the company --
 Well --
 -- wants to fill up its truck and -- and it said, well, this is going to be -- the only haul this season for me, so I want the 3-day permit.
 Yes, Your Honor, you can obtain the permits in advance. You don't have to have trucks lined up at the border waiting to get a decal or get a permit. You can purchase them in advance. So that -- that's available to the truckers. The one thing I should mention, though, is you have to have one -- you already have to have one vehicle licensed intrastate. You already have to have paid the fee on one vehicle, and then you would be eligible to purchase additional temporary permits as the need arose based on seasonal needs or an emergency situation. So that -- that allows the -- the statute -- I -- I would submit to Your Honor, allows some apportioning in and of itself.
 This -- this applies only to operations that are both licensed and registered in Michigan. Is that so?
 No. Your Honor I think is referring to the interstate fee --
 Right, right, yes.
 -- which is a different fee, which is in the Mid-Con case. Our position --
 Are you going to address the Mid-Con question?
 I'm sorry?
 Are you going to address the Mid-Con question?
 I was going to do that right now, Your Honor. The position that the State of Michigan and the Michigan Public Service Commission has is the SSRS does not preempt the interstate fee. And the reason for that is --
 Well, what's the point of the limitation in SSRS to $10 if the State can impose any additional fee it wants just by calling it a different name?
 Well, Your Honor, I think what you have to realize is you have -- when you look at the text of the statute, I think what is very clear from reading the text is that the SSRS does not preempt all State fees and charges on motor carriers. It only preempts those fees and charges that are specifically related to the registration of that motor carrier's interstate authority. The interstate fee, or the Michigan-plated vehicle fee here, is not preempted because it's a regulatory fee that does not relate to the registration of the motor carrier's SSRS interstate authority.
 Of course, it -- it does. Number one, it's somewhat suspect at the outset because it applies only to interstate travel.
 Well --
 And -- and then the -- the other vehicles pay $100 for the -- for the in-state fees, and so this seems to me that -- that on -- on its face shows that it's like a registration fee.
 Well, Your Honor, I think a couple things. Number one, I think that -- I believe that if you look at the structure of the Michigan statute, you'll see that under section 2, which contains both the interstate fee and the intrastate fee, virtually all Michigan vehicles that are plated in Michigan -- the effect of it is that all vehicles that are plated in Michigan will have paid this $100 fee. And furthermore, if you look at section 7 of the Michigan statute, which is 478.7, that involves the registration procedure. That's specifically applicable to the registration of interstate authority. And within that section 7, subsection (4) deals with the payment of the $10 fee for -- and -- and it's to be made by vehicles that are not plated in the State of Michigan.
 That's -- that's the problem.
 Well, that's the argument.
 That's the problem because here we're dealing with the fee to be paid by the people who are plated in Michigan, and it looks like that $100 is the fee for them. Well, let me -- I have a question. I'm trying to test this. Suppose that I have a company in Maine. All right? And I have -- I decide all my -- I -- I have all Maine plates, by the way. And I decide I want my -- now, let's -- one word is license plates. I'm going to talk about plating. Another word is the ICC insurance. Let's call it a decal. And the third kind of a concept is whatever you refer to in your statute by a fee. All right? The $100.
 Right.
 All right. Now, suppose in Maine what I do with my trucks is I say I want Michigan to be my home State for purposes of -- what do you call it? The SS?
 SSRS.
 Yes. And so I go to Michigan, and now I pay all the registration fees here. Do I get a -- a certificate of some kind, a decal or something to show I did it?
 No. Your Honor, I -- I -- you say that you're a Maine company --
 Yes.
 -- but your principal place of business is in Michigan?
 Yes, yes. So -- that's right.
 Okay. And your question is?
 Do I get a decal after I go through all this procedure? You have a whole form. I pay $6 for Alabama. I pay $2 for Idaho, and -- but -- but I do it all in one shopping place which happens to be Michigan.
 Okay.
 Then do I get a little certificate to put on the truck to say I did it. I -- I registered my ICC decal everywhere.
 If that vehicle -- if the vehicle you're registering is plated in Michigan --
 No, it's not.
 Okay. You will pay nothing.
 I know for Michigan. But I have to pay. But Michigan is my -- I can't ask the question until I get clear on this.
 I'm sorry.
 Don't -- when I -- when I go under this -- this 49 U.S.C. 14504 and I choose a home State --
 That's correct.
 -- and I make all the relevant payments to that State, but they distribute, don't I get a piece of paper saying I did it?
 I believe so, Your Honor.
 Fine. Now, I'm now plated in Michigan, and I make Michigan my home State for this. And I go and I make -- I say, Michigan, I'm going to give you this big check to distribute, but the amount I'm putting here for Michigan, by the way, is zero. And you say pay me $100. No. I'm not going to do it. So I haven't paid them the $100. I haven't paid Michigan everything, but I paid $2 for Idaho. Do I get the decal or don't I?
 To get a decal from Michigan, you have to be Michigan-plated and you have to pay the $100.
 Excellent. Now, if I don't get the decal, because I didn't pay the $100, then that $100 is a charge that falls within the SSI. It is a charge for a decal which shows that I registered the ICC and my insurance because otherwise, if it weren't, you'd give me the decal.
 Your Honor, we believe that under the -- the section 7 of the Michigan law, there is no fee charged for your SSRS.
 I'm talking about a fee. I'm trying to -- oh, fine. If there's no fee charged and I didn't pay the $100 and I didn't pay anything else, you'd give me the decal. But you said you wouldn't.
 Your Honor, you have to -- you have to -- if it's Michigan-plated, that's the triggering mechanism. It's not the -- that's -- that's what triggers the $100 fee.
 Mr. Boynton, may I just -- may I just ask this question? Is part of your position that the Federal statute does not prevent Michigan from waiving the $10 fee on -- for this particular purpose?
 Our position, with respect to that, Your Honor, is the fact that under section 7 of the Michigan Motor Carrier Act, 478.7, Michigan has no authority to charge a Michigan-plated vehicle any fee at all.
 Right. So that -- but you're saying to Justice Breyer then is they have waived the $10 and they do it to a narrow class, those vehicles who are plated in Michigan because they've already charged them $100, a very heavy charge for the privilege of being plated.
 Well, I don't know if I'm saying that, Your Honor. I'm saying that the -- there's a zero charge, and then there's -- there's another charge with respect to a vehicle fee. The one thing that I need to point out here is that the SSRS is not vehicle-specific. It talks about numbers of vehicles, but the Michigan decal fee for -- or the interstate fee is vehicle-specific. You have to identify the particular --
 Is that right? Let me -- let me -- I wanted to ask this question to see whether it's vehicle-specific. Suppose I have nine trucks. They're Michigan-plated, so I have to pay $100 for each of the nine.
 Interstate commerce.
 Now, suppose I -- suppose I only pay the fee for eight of them. What happens?
 And how do you want to use the truck? Do you want to use it in interstate commerce?
 No. I've paid for eight, but I haven't paid for the ninth. As I read the Michigan law, it says shall not operate any motor vehicle upon or over the highways of this State while any of the fees imposed by this act remain unpaid. Now, if -- if I can't operate the other eight because I haven't paid for the nine, that sounds to me like a vehicle-specific tax.
 Yes, it is.
 I mean -- I mean the opposite. It's -- it's not vehicle-specific.
 Oh.
 I've paid for the eight, and I can't operate at all because I haven't paid for the ninth.
 Well, I think administratively that -- that wouldn't happen. I -- I think once you go --
 It seems to me how it reads. Am I reading the law wrong? It says, shall not operate any motor vehicle while any of the fees imposed by this act remain unpaid.
 I suppose that if the -- for -- for nonpayment of fees, a motor carrier risks its authority to operate in the State.
 At all. So it's not really vehicle-specific.
 Well, I -- I think it is. I would disagree with Your Honor.
 Well, the computation is vehicle-specific, but you're using all the vehicles as hostage for the payment of -- of any shortfall. That's what you're doing, isn't it?
 So it's carrier-based.
 Well, Your Honor, I would have to disagree with Your Honor respectfully. I think that the -- that it is vehicle-specific because it identifies the particular vehicle that's involved here. And I -- I think you have to read the statute, the preemption statute, the scope of what preemption has sought to do here, and not all State fees and charges on motor carrier vehicles are preempted.
 Do you place any reliance in this scheme on the fact that the only people subject to it are people who have their principal place of business in Michigan?
 No, Your Honor. The triggering event for the interstate fee is the plating of the vehicle in Michigan.
 And -- and anyone can choose to do that? I mean, going back to Justice Breyer's example, anybody can say, well, I think I'd like to be plated in Michigan even though I operate in -- in other States. My principal place of business is in another State.
 Right. I think all parties have noted, Your Honor, that the -- under the SSRS it's much more stringent, more rigorous --
 No. I'm just asking about what you do in Michigan.
 Yes. Yes, you can.
 You really can do that?
 You can plate wherever you have contacts with the State. If your principal place of business is in Ohio but you have trucks going to and from Michigan, that -- that would allow you to plate in State of Michigan.
 You -- you can plate your whole fleet in Michigan under those circumstances.
 You could -- you can choose where to plate your feet -- plate your trucks, and a number of considerations go into that. It's not just the license plating fees. It has everything to do -- as we noted in our brief, it could have to do with no fault insurance, the weight limits on trucks. It's an economic decision and there's a number of different factors that go into that decision of where to plate a vehicle. In conclusion, I would say that the Michigan Court of Appeals correctly decided this case. And they -- they found that the challenged fees in these cases are regulatory fees, that they serve the critical function of protecting the people of Michigan that use the highways. And the Michigan Court of Appeals should be affirmed.
 Thank you, Mr. Boynton. Mr. Stewart, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: The United States as amicus curiae supports the State in American Trucking and the petitioner in Mid-Con. With respect to American Trucking, in our view the central question in resolving the constitutional issue is not whether it would be possible to apportion the intrastate fee on a more precise basis. The question is whether the Constitution requires it. And in the prior cases that we've cited in our brief, both the older cases dealing specifically with intrastate transportation and the more recent cases dealing with authority to engage in other intrastate businesses, this Court has repeatedly upheld the authority of States and municipalities to charge flat fees for the privilege of engaging in the local business within the jurisdiction during the -- the relevant period of time. And that practice --
 That seems to me really to go back on -- on Scheiner. And I thought we tried to get away from deciding Commerce Clause questions on the basis of whether it is interstate commerce or local commerce, you know, the original package doctrine and things that succeeded it. And you're -- you're just dragging back in this -- this inquiry into whether it's really interstate or -- or rather local.
 Well, with -- with respect, Your Honor, I think the Court has certainly abandoned the notion that there is a bright, absolute line between intrastate activities which are subject to plenary regulation by the States without any Commerce Clause inquiry and interstate commerce which is wholly immune from State regulation. The Court has recognized that the question is more complicated than that. But in cases like Jefferson Lines, for instance, the Court held that the sales price of a ticket for an interstate bus trip could be taxed in -- in its entirety by the State in which the ticket was purchased because the sale of the ticket was regarded as a separate, discrete event properly severable from the underlying interstate transaction. And the case for severance is all the more powerful here. That is, here we're dealing not with a -- an aspect of an interstate transaction, we're dealing with point-to-point hauls within the State of Michigan. It's true that those may be undertaken by trucks that also do interstate business, and it's even true that in some instances the intrastate load may be carried on the same truck at the same time that it's also carrying goods between the States. But the intrastate haul is itself a discrete commercial transaction. To the shipper it's wholly irrelevant, in most instances, that the -- the truck is also doing an interstate business. And to differentiate this case from Scheiner, one of the things that the Court has looked at in the dormant Commerce Clause inquiry is the risk of multiple taxation. And the Court doesn't just mean multiple taxation in -- in the abstract because it's necessarily going to be the case that an entity that does business in many States will be taxed in many States. Rather the question is whether there's an undue risk of multiple taxation on the same transaction or the same conduct or the same activity. And that was at real risk in Scheiner because if you imagine a truck that's delivering cargo from Maine to Florida and passing through several States on the way, and it's required to pay a fee that is, in essence, a fee for entering the State, has nothing to do with the mileage traveled within the jurisdiction, it's entirely reasonable to say that the imposition of those cumulative trips -- cumulative taxes for a single haul of goods from Maine to Florida is an instance of multiple taxation of the same event. Here we don't have a problem with that. The tax is being levied solely on point-to-point hauls within the State of Michigan. If a particular truck also makes point-to-point hauls in some other State within the calendar year, it may be subject to two taxes, but they can't be characterized as two taxes on the same conduct or the same transaction. The second aspect of -- of Scheiner --
 Yes, it could. I mean, if -- if this -- this truck is making one -- one haul, it's carrying some goods from Texas to -- to Maine, but some other goods it picks up along the way within Tennessee and just carries it to another place within Tennessee, and then it picks some other goods in New Jersey, carries it elsewhere to New Jersey, you're going to be taxed. It seems to me it's -- it's one trip. We never used to -- used to divide railroads on the basis of well, the ICC has jurisdiction over just the interstate portions and -- and the two stops within a State can be regulated by the State.
 I mean, I think you're right that it wouldn't be reasonable to regard the within-Texas segment or the within-Oklahoma segment of a transfer of goods between States as a discrete, separable event. But if the truck is picking up goods at one point in Texas and depositing them at another point in Texas, again from the shipper's point of view, that's clearly a discrete transaction. The shipper is unlikely to have any interest in whether the same truck is simultaneously carrying goods among the States. And it's reasonable to regard that as a discrete event that is taxable by the State in which it occurs. The other point to make about Scheiner is that even if we assume, as the petitioner argues, that the average interstate truck that makes some point-to-point hauls within Michigan will do so less frequently than the average truck that does business solely within that State, there's still a whole different class of interstate truckers that makes substantial use of Michigan's roads that could be charged taxes on the basis of mileage traveled and they're being let off the hook because the State has chosen to focus this tax on intrastate activity. Petitioners' response to this is that you can't discriminate against one class and then make up for it by -- by discriminating in favor of a different class. And if this were, to use title VII terminology, a disparate treatment case, we would agree. That is, if a State overtly discriminates against one class of interstate or out-of-state activities and on the face of the law those people are treated less favorably, then we would entirely agree that the State couldn't make up for it by giving more favorable treatment to a different class of out-of-state entities. But here the petitioner is making what amounts to a disparate impact claim, and the essence of a disparate impact claim is not that any particular individual has suffered unfair treatment. The way you prove a disparate impact claim is to show the effect cumulatively upon the class, upon interstate truckers in this case in the aggregate. And there's really no way to feel any kind of confidence that interstate truckers won't do better as a group by virtue of Michigan's decision to focus this tax on intrastate activity rather than on the basis of mileage, which would sweep in a lot of out-of-state truckers that are not currently covered. I'd like to speak briefly at least about the -- the Mid-Con case. And in our view the best way of understanding -- to -- to return to the historical antecedents of the current SSRS provision, in its original form, as enacted in 1965, the statute said it's not an unreasonable burden of -- on interstate commerce to require an interstate carrier to register its Federal certificate so along as you do so in accordance with the standards of the ICC. If you go beyond those standards, it's an unreasonable burden on commerce.
 I'd like to know the text you rely on.
 That was --
 For -- for preemption, the text of the current statute that you rely on.
 The text of the current statute is set forth at page 82 of the appendix to the certiorari petition in Mid-Con, and it's now 49 U.S.C. 14504(b). And the statute says, the first sentence, the requirement of a State that a motor carrier providing transportation subject to jurisdiction under subchapter 1 of chapter 135 -- and that refers to interstate transportation -- providing interstate transportation and providing transportation in that State must register with the State is not an unreasonable burden on transportation referred to in section 13501.
 13501 deals just with SSRS.
 No. 13501 is the provision that -- that defines the general regulatory jurisdiction of the Department of Transportation and the Surface Transportation Board. And it basically says these agencies have general regulatory jurisdiction over transportation between points in one State and points in another State and -- or between points in the same State passing through another State. So in -- in using that shorthand reference, the Congress just means interstate transportation.
 May I ask this question? Because I know your time is short. Supposing Michigan imposed a new $10 fee per -- and it identified it precisely as in order to comply with that statute and then reduced its present plating fee from $100 to $90, would that be permissible?
 Well, as long as the -- again, to -- in our view the distinctive and disqualifying feature of the current statute is that subsection (2) is imposed specifically on vehicles that operate entirely in interstate commerce. And if Michigan reduced to $90 the extra --
 I'm not saying -- they reduced to $90 the plating fee, but then they enacted a new $10 fee specifically designed to comply with the statute.
 As long as --
 Could they do that?
 As long as they were still imposing that additional -- again --
 The $90 is for plating. It said only -- only Michigan-plated vehicles pay the $90. Everybody else -- everybody -- and everybody also pays the $10.
 As long as that $90 fee was imposed not just on Michigan-plated vehicles generally, but specifically on Michigan-plated vehicles that operate entirely in interstate commerce, we would say that's preempted because our reading of the statute is that basically Congress has said there's a severe limit on what you can do to interstate carriers that you don't do to intrastate carriers.
 Where does it say that? Let -- let me come back to the -- to the section of the statute you're quoting. You didn't finish the sentence. It says that it's not an unreasonable burden when the State registration is completed under standards of the Secretary under subsection (c). Subsection (c) is entitled SSRS, Single State Registration System.
 May I answer, Mr. Chief Justice?
 Briefly.
 The State doesn't argue that this registration was completed in accordance with this standard. It argues that the provision doesn't apply at all because this is not the sort of registration requirement that the statute speaks of. We think it is because it's imposed strictly on interstate carriers.
 Thank you, Mr. Stewart. Mr. Digges, you have 4 minutes remaining.
 Thank you. I'd like to just briefly cover three points. First, I believe that -- that is accurate to say that the Solicitor General's position is returning us to the pre-Complete Auto days of line-drawing, but more than that, the Solicitor General's position is ignoring the practical effect of these fees on taxpayers. I think the -- the citation to the Peddler v. Drummer line of cases illustrates that. The only difference between the Peddler cases and the Drummer cases was that in the -- in the Nippert case and -- and the Drummer case, they looked at the practical effect on an out-of-state salesman and whether that salesman would be discouraged by the $50 fee that was being imposed from coming into the State. In the Wagner case, they simply said that the fee fell on an essentially local event, didn't look at the form of the fee, didn't look at the form of the fee on the out-of-state salesman. I don't think it can be disputed that to out-of-state -- that out-of-state salesmen would be equally discouraged from coming into a State because a $50 fee or a $100 fee, whether or not they're carrying the goods with them in at that time or whether the goods are later mailed in. So, again, I think it is returning to the line-drawing issues, and really there is no test that is made as to, after you -- you draw these lines, what the appropriate test should be. The second point is it -- with respect to the administrative practicality of apportioning these fees. The purpose of apportionment would not be, as in a highway tax, to -- to show the amount of highway damage that was done by a truck. The purpose of apportionment here is simply to show the extent of the taxpayer's level of activity in the State. It would be like a general revenue tax in which we're trying to allocate the taxpayer's activity to particular States, make sure that that taxpayer is paying its fair share of the State's costs with respect -- of the State's generic costs, in this case, generic regulatory costs. So, again, I think that apportionment would be very easy. As Justice Scalia said, the trucking industry is willing to take the onus of this. We bill by the mile. You could do it on number of loads. You could do it in a lot -- a lot of ways. And by apportioning the fee, you eliminate the burden and you make the out-of-state carrier, who would be otherwise prohibited from only hauling a load or two -- he would then have the ability to haul that load and -- and not be discriminated against. The final area I'd like to talk about a little bit is the need for additional -- the need for evidence in this case. Again, in the Nippert and the Scheiner cases, there -- they -- they -- it was expressly said that there was no need for evidence in the cases because in the general average of instances, the out-of-state trucker will always pay more than the in-state trucker. And in answer to your question, Justice Stevens, I think it was recognized in those cases that there would be some exceptions to that rule. There would be a few out-of-state carriers that would operate more heavily in the State than in-state carriers. But that exception wasn't -- wasn't what was going to happen and the most often, and that the average of instances, it would always work to the disadvantage of the out-of-state carriers. And -- and the final point is that with respect to evidence, you have here also a failure of internal consistency test, and this Court has said a number of times that failure internal -- of internal consistency is not a test related -- it doesn't rely on specific facts but it relies on hypotheticals. And in this instance, I think there's a very clear failure of internal consistency. Like in Scheiner, there's a cumulative burden on an out-of-state trucker. If a trucker wants to operate in intrastate commerce around the country, it has to -- and just haul one load in every State, it has to pay 48 times a $100 fee or pay $4,800 in eligible -- in order to be eligible to haul in all of those States. So that illustrates how that's going to balkanize commerce, that that carrier is not going to be able to pay that kind of entrance fee nationwide. So that carrier will operate in less intrastate activities in -- in only a few States or maybe none. And again, we think that that defeats the purpose. When Congress passed economic deregulation of the trucking industry, that they wanted to open it up to out-of-state carriers to be able to augment their interstate loads.
 Thank you, Mr. Digges.
 Thank you.
 The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument now in the Merck KGaA v. Integra Lifesciences. Mr. Rosenkranz.
 Thank you, Your -- Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Your Honors, there is no dispute among the parties, nor among the 19 amicus briefs presented before the Court today. As to the answer to the threshold legal question, everyone agrees that the FDA exemption does, indeed, apply, with full force, to the sorts of experiments that are conducted and that would be relevant to the FDA in consideration of an Investigational New Drug application, a so-called IND. So the battleground now shifts to Integra's alternative arguments in support of the judgment --
 Well, would you just clarify something for me as we start to consider the case? I guess this thing went to the jury under an instruction that tried to come to grips with the definition under the statute in some way. Was that instruction one to which Merck preserved an objection?
 No, Your Honor. We did not object to the core of the jury's instructions stating the legal standard. And we --
 Do you think it was properly stated in that instruction?
 The core of the instruction, yes, Your Honor, was --
 That's as good as we could do.
 Your Honor, I believe -- the answer is, the core was as good as this Court can do, and
 All right. And, under that, you think that Merck was entitled to a directed verdict --
 Yes, Your Honor.
 -- from the evidence?
 It was entitled to a verdict as a matter of law, but let me just --
 Okay, but the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit did not address the case in -- by looking at the evidence and whether a directed verdict should have been given --
 Your Honor, the --
 -- or not?
 -- the Federal Circuit did understand that this was a JMOL case --
 I know, but it seemed to decide the case based on its view of the statute as just applying to generic drugs or something like that.
 That is absolutely correct, Your Honor.
 So it didn't, in fact, come to grips with the evidence.
 It absolutely did not come to grips with the evidence, nor did it grapple with the alternative arguments that Integra was presenting --
 Yes, so --
 -- so they --
 -- maybe all we have to do is deal with whether that court should have addressed the evidence.
 That would be one answer, Your Honor, reverse and not addressing the alternative legal grounds, but I would urge this Court to address the alternative grounds, because they raise --
 All of them? You mean, like the research tools problem?
 No, Your Honor, because the research tools problem was never presented --
 No.
 -- as an issue before the jury or before the District Court. And --
 Or the Tripps Treaty?
 No, Your Honor.
 No.
 In fact, that's not even raised by Respondents. It's raised by amici's --
 All right. And how about the common-law research example --
 I would -- I would urge the Court not broach the subject of any of the questions that are not properly presented --
 Okay, so --
 -- to this Court.
 -- all we're doing is looking at the statute.
 We're --
 Thank you.
 Yes, Your Honor, we're looking at the statute --
 Okay.
 -- but it is an -- it is important, in answer to the very first question, to embellish a bit, because the lower courts need this Court's guidance, because every one of the theories on which Integra defends the judgment below raise exactly the same problems that the Federal Circuit's opinion raises. They defy the plain language of the statute Congress passed. They are equally at odds with the purpose that Congress had in mind when it passed the FDA exemption.
 What are the alternative grounds that you're discussing now passed on by the Federal Circuit?
 Your Honor, they were not passed on by the Federal Circuit, except perhaps to the extent that the Federal Circuit may have concluded that all -- or that, excuse me -- that safety is the only issue before the FDA when it is considering an Investigational New Drug application, or that a drug innovator may not harbor additional purposes in an experiment beyond the FDA exemption, or that the -- excuse me -- beyond FDA regulatory purposes -- or, third, that the exemption does not cover efforts to optimize the drug candidate after it's identified and that drug candidate is, in fact, the lead candidate. Those are the three legal theories, Your Honors, on which Integra is resting its defense of the judgment below. And every single one of them is either incorrect as a matter of law or immaterial as a matter of law. If this Court were to ask Integra to come up with a single genuine issue of fact that does not relate to one or another of those three propositions, it will not be able to do so, save a footnote to be addressed later about the credibility of witnesses on a topic on which Integra never argued the witnesses were not credible. Just beginning with the safety question, and I'll defer to the Government on that, because the Government can speak better than anyone else as to what it is that is relevant to the FDA in consideration of an IND, suffice it to say that the regulations say, as a matter of law, that safety is not the only consideration before the FDA as it considers an IND. The FDA cares very much about whether a drug will work: efficacy. The FDA cares very much about how it works: mechanism of action. It cares about what the body does to that drug: pharmacokinetics. And it cares very much about what that drug does to the body: pharmacology. And Integra's position before the jury, and before this Court, depends upon the proposition that it can bring in a witness to argue that the law is other than what the law clearly is. And the same thing goes for the so-called GLP studies that the FDA considers in connection with safety data, but need not limit itself to GLP studies when it's considering those other IND-relevant topics.
 Mr. Rosenkranz, just one piece of information. Because the IND is so important at this point, is it in the record -- do we have a copy of the IND?
 The IND, Your Honor, is not in the record, because it was excluded from evidence, which may be why the jury reached the wrong conclusion. But, I hasten to add, that will not be uncommon in these sorts of cases, because there are many circumstances in which a preclinical study begins and fails, and the IND will never materialize. There are circumstances in which a preliminary injunction is brought and won, and the research stops cold, so an IND never materializes. And, again, it's important to understand, as one assesses the FDA exemption, that the inquiry is always ex ante, it is always, "What is a reasonable drug innovator? What does that drug innovator or scientist know at the point in time at which it is about to perform the next set of experiments?" So you always reflect back to a point in time before the IND materializes.
 Mr. Rosenkranz, the items you listed earlier seemed to me to more narrow than what I took to be the point of your opening brief, which was that the decision below was wrong because the Federal Circuit simply excluded all consideration of materials prepared for purposes of the IND, as opposed to materials prepared for the -- for the drug application, later on. Are you abandoning that more expansive position?
 No, Your Honor.
 Because I don't read the opinion that way. I don't think that opinion has to be read to say that they're not going to allow in anything that goes to the IND.
 Your Honor, there is certainly a way to read the Federal Circuit's opinion -- and this is also in response to Justice O'Connor's earlier question -- in which it did grapple with the very questions we're talking about now, and did answer the questions about whether it's just safety -- and I believe the Federal Circuit believed that only safety data were relevant; that is certainly what it indicated in oral argument -- and also that dual purposes are not permissible. So let me now turn to the dual-purpose question, because it's another major theme of --
 Have you answered my question? You're abandoning the assertion that the Federal Circuit did not consider anything that didn't go to the IND -- that didn't go to the --
 The --
 -- drug application.
 No, Your Honor. I believe that there are two ways to read the Federal Circuit's opinion. To the extent that the Federal Circuit said nothing before the clinical stage is relevant to the FDA exemption -- if that is what the Federal Circuit held, we are -- we are not abandoning the position that that is wrong. I understand that there is another way to read the Federal Circuit's opinion that grapples with the subsidiary questions that we're discussing here, which are all fairly presented in our question presented. And that's what I'm addressing myself to now.
 For your first answer, are you relying what the Federal Circuit said in its opinion -- and it's in 10a of our cert petition appendix -- that is, the Federal Circuit's statement of the question presented, whether the preclinical research conducted under Scripps-Merck agreement is exempt from liability for infringement of Integra's patents.
 Yes, Your Honor. And then, two pages later, on 12a, the Federal Circuit states its conclusion, and I quote, "Thus, the Scripps work sponsored by Merck was not solely for use as reasonably related to clinical testing for the FDA."
 Yes, but it -- it's not at all clear in the opinion that the Court was using preclinical and clinical in the very technical sense that you were -- that you use it, which means "clinical" is stuff submitted for the drug application, and "preclinical" is for the earlier application. That is not at all --
 Your Honor, it's not at all clear. And, just as in Boyle, when this Court faced a situation where it wasn't clear what the Federal -- or, excuse me -- what the Court of Appeals held, the Court --, "The best thing for this Court to do is to address what appears to be the threshold question that the Court of Appeals decided," but then also to address the subsidiary questions on the basis of which Integra is defending the judgment below.
 Well, Mr. Rosenkranz --
 A moment ago -- a moment ago, you were reading from 12(a). Was it the first sentence you were reading from?
 It was the first paragraph, and I was reading from the end of that paragraph, Your Honor, the -- which begins, "Thus," three lines -- really two -- the word "thus" is at the end of the third line from the bottom of that paragraph, Your Honor.
 Thank you.
 And so, I was saying earlier that a critical component of Integra's case revolves around the notion that the use may not have more than one purpose, and that purpose can only be FDA directed. That argument is also incorrect as a matter of law. And one way we can tell that is that there is no such thing as a preclinical course of study that has only one purpose. When one is studying mechanism of action, a scientist is deeply interested, not just in how this drug works, but in how the disease works. And the language of the statute is, of course, the touchstone here. The statute is triggered by uses. The use, in this context, is an experiment. And the statute covers, provides a safe harbor for, experiments that develop the sorts of information that are relevant to the FDA. If that --
 Would that -- would that -- would that be explained by the research-tool doctrine, or not?
 No, absolutely not, Your Honor. The research-tool question -- let me begin by saying, these were not research tools; these RGD peptides were the objects of study.
 I guess what I was asking, Would you ever use the peptide as a research tool, was my -- was my question.
 Oh, yes, Your Honor. There are circumstances in which these peptides could be used as research tools to stunt the growth of blood vessels and study what happens next with other compounds, but they were emphatically not used as research tools in this case. In this case, they were the objects of study, and Integra won a jury verdict based upon that presentation. And, in fact, never argued to any court or to the jury that there is a resource tool carve out. So, I was just talking about the subjective purpose earlier, and it is -- again, it's important to note that the information can be used for other purposes. There's nothing in the statute that prohibits that. Now, let me turn, just briefly then, to what is often one of the most important questions in these FDA exemption cases, which is the timeline question. At what point in the arc of drug development is it unreasonable for a jury to conclude that the FDA is an inappropriate audience for the next set of experiments? Our position -- and people may differ, as a matter of law, as to whether it is earlier -- but our argument is, at a bare minimum, at the point in time at which a drug developer has a known structure and cures a disease in an animal with that known structure, all eyes turn to drug development; which is to say, all eyes turn to the FDA. As a matter of law, everything after that, so long as it's relevant to the FDA, is FDA -- is appropriate to view as FDA directed.
 Do you agree then that at whatever period, however you want to describe the period, at which the researcher is basically trying to figure out what drug to concentrate on, that that period is too far back in time to come within the exception?
 No, Your Honor. That's exactly the trigger moment. If it has a structure, and it's investigating analogs of that structure to figure out which of these various structures are the best ones to move forward, everything from that point on is FDA directed.
 Okay, here's what -- here's the problem I have with your argument. I can understand that argument more easily under the statute, under the text of the statute as it is written, than I can understand it under the instruction that you agreed to, because the instruction that you agreed to had a limitation, a textual limitation which is not in the statute itself, that refers to "relatively directly" as describing the relationship between this information and its object. And if we decide this case on the basis of the statute, and we read the statute more broadly than the instruction, then you're getting something that you're not entitled to, because you agreed to the instruction. If we decide this issue by construing the statute as if your instruction is correct, then we're making an assumption about the proper construction of the statute that has not been argued here.
 Well, Your Honor --
 It seems to me that the law of the case, as to what the statute means for your case, is set by the instruction, and that is why I am reluctant to get into the issue that you raise here, because I think we're rather -- you are limited, and we are tied in what we can do as a result of your agreement with the instruction.
 Your Honor -- and I see my time is running out; I'd like to reserve a bit for rebuttal, so let me answer, just briefly. Under Praprotnik, of course, this Court is not bound by law of the case by the instruction. But the instruction, as I understand it, says exactly what the statute says. "Reasonably directly" is simply another way of saying, "Are these activities reasonably related to the FDA purposes?" And every one of the comparative experiments is relevant to the FDA's inquiry, whether this drug or that is the optimum drug. Every experiment that is involved here -- and there were only 10 percent that were comparative in nature -- develops information about the lead drug candidate, including understanding why this one works, rather than that one. So, if it's all right, Your Honors, I'd like to reserve the remainder of my time for rebuttal.
 Very well, Mr. Rosenkranz. Mr. Joseffer.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: I believe the question before the Court is the proper construction of the statute, and we believe the lower courts committed three important legal errors that should be corrected. The first is in drawing the clinical/preclinical distinction. And, understanding that, Justice Scalia, I think the important thing to understand is that clinical studies refer to studies conducted on humans, and at the IND stage, the whole question is to decide whether studies should be conducted on humans. So at that point in time the only information that's available is the preclinical studies on animals and in test tubes. So when the Court distinguished between preclinical and clinical, it was essentially saying, you cannot do the information that's necessary to submit an IND, necessary to do clinical trials, necessary to get your drug approved. And that's why we -- it seems to us that that's clearly wrong.
 Do you have to have the FDA's permission to start clinical testing?
 Yes, that's the purpose of an IND application, is -- the whole -- the only thing that FDA is looking at, at that point, is whether to permit human clinical trials to proceed. The second important legal error committed by the Federal Circuit was in apparently concluding that only tests regarding the compounds ultimately submitted to FDA in an IND are subject to the protection. Now, the problem with that is that a company can decide which specific compound to submit only by first comparing -- doing studies on that compound and on others in order to determine which would be the best compound to submit, which would strike the best balance between obtaining health effects or avoiding safety concerns. So, if the exemption only --
 Would you state again what you say the second error was?
 The second error, we believe, is that the Federal Circuit indicated that only studies undertaken on the single compound ultimately submitted in an IND are protected by the exception. And the problem with that is that I can't figure out what that one compound is until I've done studies on it and on other compounds to determine --
 That --
 -- which is the best to submit.
 But that might well determine whether the research was relatively directly related. I mean, if I were a juror, I would -- I would say it's relatively directly related if it relates to that particular compound which is ultimately submitted, and not relatively directly related if it was preliminary, trying to found out which compound to submit.
 We would -- we would look at it this way. If I'm -- say I have 12 compounds that I'm going to test and decide which is best and go forward with. At the time I'm doing a test on any one of those compounds, if those tests succeed, it's reasonably foreseeable I'll submit an IND for that compound.
 Yes, I understand all that. But --
 And the --
 -- I'm just saying that that is certainly one interpretation of "reasonably directly." And if that is so, then you are erroneous in your assumption that the question before this Court is the meaning of the statute. It might not be. It might be -- it might be the meaning of the instruction.
 Well, I think we would disagree with that, for two reasons. The first is that the Federal Circuit, as Justice O'Connor noted, reserved -- resolved these questions entirely as a matter of law, based on a de novo interpretation of the statute, without regard to the jury instruction. And that's the holding that's now before this Court.
 What's your position on the jury instruction? Does it correctly state the law?
 We think that it's -- if it's construed correctly, we think that it's correct, but just too general to be of assistance to the courts in addressing the more specific questions of the issue here. And this is -- remember, Merck has sought judgment as a matter of law. And when a party seeks judgment as a matter of law, the courts are not constrained to only applying the law that's found in the jury instruction; they can also articulate and apply -- and do all the time -- other legal principles that are relevant. Praprotnik v. St. Louis is a great example of a case where this Court did that. Now, there would be a problem if the jury instruction was inconsistent with the correct rule of law, because then there could be a waiver concern. But we don't see that at issue here, because the jury instruction, we think, was just too general to speak to these issues. But getting back to my point about why it can't be limited to that single compound --
 But who's fault is that that the jury instruction is too general. I mean, if both parties agreed to it, aren't they, in a sense, bound by it?
 We think that the Petitioner should not, and is not, arguing inconsistently with the jury instruction. The point is just that juries, being lay people, tend to be instructed --
 The Petitioner said he agreed with the core of the instruction, whatever that is.
 I think that's just with the general principles. Take, for example, a negligence case. Jurors are instructed all the time that the Defendant has a duty of ordinary care. And then courts, on appeal, will determine more specific legal questions, whether entire classes of conduct do or do not comply with the ordinary care, in much greater detailed instructions to the jury. And example of a case where this Court did that would be Shenker v. B&O Railroad, at 374 U.S. 1. And we think that in a -- in determining whether a Petitioner is entitled to judgment as a matter of law, this Court should just articulate and apply the specific legal principles here; they're not inconsistent with the jury --
 Was the court below wrong in saying that the statute was enacted only to help generic-drug development?
 Yes. In fact, this Court already held in Eli Lilly v. Medtronic that the statute is not limited to generic drugs. In fact, it's not even limited to drugs, but also applies to things like medical devices, food additives, color additives. And it's a very important point, because the Federal Circuit thought the statute to be construed in an artificially narrow manner in light of a supposed focus on generic drugs, which is just inconsistent with this Court's authoritative construction of the statute.
 Is that going to be your third point, the third error that the court supposedly committed?
 No, the third is the error committed by the District Court and relied on by Respondents here, which is the statement that FDA only considers safety, and not efficacy, in determining whether to permit human clinical trials to proceed. It's a very important point, because at the IND stage the question for FDA is whether a drug should be given to human beings. And because there's no such thing as an absolutely safe drug, because all drugs entail at least some safety risks, FDA will not let human clinical trials proceed unless there's some reason to believe that the study could be useful. It's a -- it's a benefit-risk analysis. The Court looks to whether the potential benefits of the test would outweigh the risks of the test; and if not, the Court will not let a test proceed. Now, Congress charged FDA with doing that by instructing FDA to determine whether the drug would pose an unreasonable risk to the health and safety of humans. And FDA has construed that, as I said, to mean the benefit-risk. The most express articulation of that comes in the guidance document that FDA has put out regarding the preparation of the investigators brochure, which is a required part of the 9d submission. And the investigators -- and the guidance document explains that the investigators brochure must provide sufficient information for the -- for the reader to, quote, "make his/her own unbiased risk-benefit assessment of the proposed clinical." That's set forth on the bottom of page 10 of our brief. And --
 What are the consequences if someone goes ahead and conducts a clinical trial without the approval of the FDA?
 That's contrary to federal law. I -- certainly would be severe civil consequences. And my guess is there are criminal consequences for doing that, too.
 Your time is short, so could you tell us how far back you think, under the statute, you can go and not -- and be within the safe harbor?
 Yes. We think that the proper test looks to whether a company is trying to develop a particular drug, by which we mean a substance with particular characteristics designed to achieve particular objectives. To explain that, we recognize that basic scientific research into human biology and disease processes is not protected. That's just too far down the stream of causation. But once I get a particular concept for a drug, this says I'm going to treat the disease in a particular way by targeting a particular part of the disease process. Then we think that the work done, going forward, with includes comparing different substances to figure out which would be the best active ingredient, is protected. To provide a concrete example --
 Why isn't that basic research? I mean, I want to -- I want to treat this disease by stifling the development of blood cells around it, or something like that, and then you ask yourself, "Gee, what would stifle the production of blood cells?" And let's assume there hasn't been any research done in that field before. You wouldn't consider that basic research, so long as the idea I have in my -- in my head is, I want to create a drug to treat this disease that will stifle blood cells?
 No. And here's why. The basic insight, and then I'll explain it, is that the first time a study -- a study is run on a particular substance, if that's -- first study is not protected, then the exemption is worthless, because I'd have to commit that infringing study before I gained the protection of the exemption. So, we would say that the -- in this case, for example -- I think it's easier on particulars -- the basic research was figuring out that the key to cancer is -- the key to the growth of tumors is angiogenesis, and the key to blocking angiogenesis is blocking the alpha v beta 3 receptors. That's the basic research into how the body works. But once I then start trying to figure out which substance would best block an alpha v beta 3 receptor, it's very specific, because I know what that receptor is, I know what it's like, I know what characteristics I'm going to need in a drug to block that. And when I try different things out to block that, that first experiment, at that point, has to be protected, because, otherwise, I'd have to commit the infringement before I could get --
 Did the earlier process that you described, the basic research, is that within the common law research exemption?
 The -- it would be if it was noncommercial.
 How does the common law research exemption figure into this case, if at all?
 It's not directly before here because Petitioner has not relied on it at all, and for good reason, which is that the courts have consistently held that the common law research exception applies only to noncommercial activity. The most obvious example would be kids in their basements. But when a drug company, that its entire business is developing and manufacturing drugs, undertakes the activity, that's commercial, and that's never been considered protected by the common law exception.
 Does Scripps -- is Scripps in the business, too?
 I see my red light is on, if I could answer the question. Some of Scripps' work, when it's working directly for Merck, certainly is, we would think, you know, tied closely to Merck's commercial activities. Scripps may also do some other bioresearch --
 Thank you, Mr. Joseffer. Mr. Flores.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: This Court stated, in Black versus Cutter Laboratories, which is cited on page 27 of our brief, as follows, "At times, the atmosphere in which an opinion is written may become so surcharged that unnecessarily broad statements are made. In such a case, it is our duty to look beyond the broad sweep of the language and determine for ourselves precisely the ground on which the judgment rests." This is such a case. The judgment of the Federal Circuit was its order affirming the District Court's denial of Merck's motion for judgment as a matter of law. The precise grounds for the Federal Circuit's opinion is set forth in page 14a in the appendix attached to Merck's petition for certiorari. And there the Federal Circuit said that it upheld the denial of Merck's motion for judgment as a matter of law because the Federal Circuit discerned no error in the District Court's interpretation of section 271(e)(1), which raises the question --
 Where is this? Page 14a --
 Yes, Your --
 What are you quoting from?
 Is it just before the letter "b" on 14a?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 What are the first few words of the sentence there that you quoted?
 "Because the language and context of the safe harbor do not embrace the Scripps-Merck general biomedical experimentation, this Court discerns no error" --
 Exactly. And so, they are saying that they're wrong on their ground for thinking that the language and context don't embrace it. Since they used the wrong standard, they never got to the question of whether the evidence warranted a directed verdict. So I don't see how we avoid looking at all of what you'd call the atmospherics.
 The precise holding and the reasoning of the Federal Circuit was, they found no error in what the District Court's --
 Because they interpreted the statute in a particular way. Isn't that right? I'm asking. I'm not --
 No, Your Honor.
 No?
 The only interpretation of the statute that can be found in the District Court's order denying Merck's motion for judgment as a matter of law is the standard articulated in the jury instruction.
 No, but I think -- I think the Justice was asking whether it was the Court of Appeals that --
 Yes.
 -- applied a particular standard. And certainly it had to have been. Didn't the Court of Appeals have a particular standard as to what constituted general biomedical experimentation, as opposed to the kind of experimentation that's covered by the -- by the safe harbor exemption? It must have had. I mean, how could you -- how could you rule on the question before you unless you have, in your head, a notion of what the safe harbor consists of and what is beyond it?
 The question before the Federal Circuit was whether the District Court erred by not applying the rational predicate interpretation of section 271(e), which was the sole focus of Merck's appeal to the Federal Circuit.
 Why should we say that's the question, when the Federal Circuit, itself, said what I read before from 10a?
 Your Honor, on page 10a, the Federal Circuit said, "Thus" -- and this is in the -- the last sentence in the middle paragraph of the page -- "Thus, this Court must determine whether section -- the section 271(e) safe harbor reaches back down the chain of experimentation to embrace development and identification of new drugs that will, in turn, be subject to FDA approval."
 That would answer that question?
 It does not. The Federal Circuit answered that in the negative. The Federal Circuit rejected the interpretation advanced by Merck, which was the rational predicate standard, which was basically a causal test, and held that the District Court's interpretation, under the Intermedics standard that's given in the jury instruction, that Merck now concedes is the correct standard.
 So they say that it does not -- the safe harbor does not reach, among other things, back down the chain of experimentation to embrace the development of new drugs that will be subject to FDA approval. In your opinion, is that statement, as I read it -- I left out the word "identification" -- as I read it, is that statement a correct statement of the law, or incorrect statement?
 That is a correct statement of the law.
 That is a correct statement of the law. So then, I take it, the other thinks that it isn't, because, for example, you could have a situation where you are developing drugs, and, in developing drugs, you do some experiments and you get some information that would be useful to the FDA and the IND process, and, therefore, they are within the safe harbor.
 No, Your Honor. I believe the Solicitor General agrees with this aspect of the Federal Circuit's opinion and makes that clear at the bottom of page 15 and onto page 16 of the Solicitor General's brief. Merck no longer challenges this aspect of the Federal Circuit's opinion. Merck concedes that there are experiments in the basic research phase, that, although they're necessary in the chain of causation, are not exempt. The rational -- Merck has abandoned the rational predicate standard that the Federal Circuit rejected here.
 Mr. Flores, when I asked you about the sentence on page 10, I intended, not the one that you read, but an earlier one that precedes it, and that is, "The questioning arising in this case is whether the preclinical research" -- that is, the research on animals, as distinguished from humans -- "conducted under the Scripps-Merck agreement is exempt from liability for infringement of Integra's patents." Now, if you just took that as the question, then you would say it -- this Circuit is drawing the line between clinical and preclinical. It's not a crystal-clear opinion, by any means, but that is one question presented that they've identified. And how do they answer that question?
 Your Honor, I disagree. I think the operative language in this sentence is the reference to "the Scripps-Merck" -- is to "research conducted under the Scripps-Merck agreement."
 That's the way I read it. It -- the -- and this is why I was disagreeing with counsel from the other side. It -- well, counsel ultimately conceded, you could read it not to draw the line between clinical and preclinical. And the way you read this sentence is -- the question, they say, is not whether preclinical research falls under 271(e)(1); it's whether the "preclinical research conducted under the Scripps- Merck agreement." And then the next sentence explains what that means. The experiments did not supply information for submission to the United States Food and Drug Administration, but, instead, identified the best drug candidate. So, I think what they're describing as the question presented is whether preclinical research that is -- that is not directed to supplying information for submission to the Food and Drug Administration, but, instead, to selecting the drug candidate, whether that type of preclinical research is within the safe harbor.
 Yes. In fact, Justice Scalia, if this opinion by the Federal Circuit were interpreted to hold that preclinical experiments are categorically excluded from the scope of the exemption, that holding would be inconsistent with the District Court's interpretation of the law, because the District Court's interpretation of the law was that preclinical experiments are potentially eligible, and the District Court submitted the question to the jury. So the Federal Circuit would be completely inconsistent, if, on the one hand, it categorically excluded preclinical experiments, and, on the other hand, it approved the District Court's reasoning.
 This very dialogue makes me able to ask a question that I think will reveal better to you what I need an answer to. Reading this, and listening to the discussion, and your use of the word "atmospherics," suggests that the opinion below is pretty foggy. We have Merck, the Food and Drug Administration, the Government, the entire biotechnology industry, the drug industry of the United States, and everybody else telling us that they are wrong in the way they stated the standard. And you, yourself, urge us to look beyond the way they stated it. So, what's the harm, and why wouldn't we, given this and the unclarity, just try to do a better job at stating the standard, say, "That's the standard," and then send it back, and then you can make all your arguments there about how it applies.
 Yes. The reason it would not be appropriate for the Court to do so is because no standard, other than the Intermedics standard that was applied by the District Court, was ever suggested to the District Court. There was only one standard ever considered.
 We're not reviewing the District Court's opinion. We granted certiorari as to the particular question which will deal with what was the Court of Appeals opinion. We don't ordinarily simply compare the Court of Appeals' opinion with the District Court's opinion to see if they parse.
 Yes, Your Honor. But in this case the issue before the District Court was whether the District Court erred in denying a motion for judgment as a matter of law.
 Well, don't you think that the Federal Circuit may have focused too much on generic drug applications? Do you think it was right about that?
 I think the Federal Circuit was right, as a factual matter, in describing the impetus for Congress adopting section 271(e).
 Well, it seemed to be driven by its very narrow focus on generic drug development. Do you -- do you think that the efficacy of the drug being suggested plays a role in the IND application?
 No, Your Honor, it does not.
 See, I think there may be a difference there, because I think the other side thinks that how the drug is expected to work, in practice, and whether it, in fact, will attack a certain disease, is part of what the FDA looks at. Apparently, the Government takes that position, as narrowly as I could determine. But you reject that, as well.
 Yes, Your Honor. I think the answer to that is in the statute. It's a -- it's section -- it's 21 United States Code 355(i)(3)(B)(i). And in that --
 Can you repeat that 355 what?
 (i) --
 -- (i) --
 -- (3) -- -- (B)(i) again. And, in this section, Congress is telling the FDA what are the considerations that the FDA has to weigh in making the safety decision, the decision whether to allow clinical trials in humans --
 Is this text that you're referring to, is it someplace -- is the text someplace where we can look at it while you're explaining this to us?
 No, Your Honor, it's not in the appendix, unfortunately. Let me read that statute, because it's instructive about what Congress told FDA to weigh for the --
 But does the -- does the statute -- is that the only place we would look to decide whether safety is the only consideration for the FDA?
 No, Your Honor. The regulations, I believe, address that. And the regulations are 312.22(a), which is in the appendix attached to Integra's brief on the merits. And I'll read that. It says --
 But you do --
 What are you --
 -- you do agree, do you not, that the Government does not agree with you on this point?
 The Government disagrees, Your Honor.
 Right.
 What are you reading from?
 Page 3a in the addendum to Integra's brief.
 Okay.
 That's 21 C.F.R. Section 312.22(a). It states that, "The FDA's primary objectives in reviewing an IND are, in all phases of the investigation, to assure the safety and rights of subjects, and, in phase two and three, to help assure that the quality of the scientific investigation of the drugs is adequate to permit an evaluation of the drug's effectiveness and safety."
 Okay, that talks about the primary concern. There is certainly going to be concern with efficacy to this extent. They are going to want to know, before they allow clinical trials, whether the drug that it is proposed to give cancer patients has some relationship to cancer, as opposed to the common cold. Admittedly, at the clinical trial they're trying to find out how effective it is on human beings, but there's got to be some threshold showing of effectiveness. They can't simply ignore effectiveness and look at safety entirely prior to that point.
 In fact, that paragraph refers to effectiveness, as I read it.
 Yes, it does, Your Honor. But it does -- it refers to it in the context of phases two and three. And the simple fact is that until there's clinical trials in humans, there's no way tell whether this drug is going to be effective.
 But there is at least -- there's got to be some way to tell whether it even addresses the disease. That is essentially a threshold effectiveness question.
 The FDA statutes and regulations do not use the term "efficacy" to describe that. In section 355(i)(3)(B)(i), when Congress listed the factors to consider, what it listed was not efficacy. Efficacy is not to be found where its listed --
 Congress described the need that there be some relationship between the consequences of taking the given drug and the disease which is supposed to be addressed by taking the drug. If they didn't use the word "efficacy," what word did they use?
 They --
 They used the word "effectiveness," which is pretty close. [Laughter.]
 No, Your Honor, they used the word, in the statute, "the condition for which the drug is to be investigated."
 That's important. They say they want to know the pharmacological action of the drug in relation to its proposed therapeutic indication. The reason, I take it, the word "efficacy" is not there directly is because that word has a history, the Kefauver hearings, and it was involving drugs that don't do anything. Safety is a different matter. But of course when you consider whether something is safe, you must know, since, for example, cancer drugs poison people, the extent to which that poisoning is outbalanced by its effect in curing people. So how could you possibly, particularly where cancer is at issue, know whether this is an appropriately safe drug, without knowing how effective it is, as well as knowing the side effects that are -- that are harmful? If I knew that there was any answer to that question at all, I might be tempted to agree with you, because it doesn't use the word. But what's the answer?
 The answer is that the FDA considers what information is available to it. It does not have information about the effectiveness of the drug, because clinical trials have not taken place; and, therefore, the regulations and the statutes say you do the -- what you can. You look at the condition for which the drug --
 But why wouldn't it have information about effectiveness on animals? I mean, if the -- you show that the -- all the FDA's interested in is that it didn't kill the animal, never mind whether it was effective to cure the tumor?
 The FDA is concerned with safety in animals. And there may be some cases in which there is a known safety risk to a drug, and there will be a heightened look at potential benefits in order to balance that out. But the regulations focus on safety. And in this particular case --
 Yes, but it's absolutely clear, I thought, that the FDA, at the end of the day in some of these drug applications, ends up looking at not only safety, but how effective it is. And sometimes if the safety risk is minimal but the effectiveness is great, I understood at least, that could affect the decisions. So, I would think that you would want to encourage the exemption to cover those matters.
 Your Honor, of course FDA is very concerned about efficacy, and it -- but concerned about that after it gets data from human clinical trials. That's the -- that is the basis of --
 Well, I'm not sure. If there's data earlier, at the IND stage, as a result of the lab tests and the animal tests, I would think that would be part of the exemption.
 If efficacy -- or some information about what benefits the drug might have, is probably a better way to phrase it -- is considered at the safety stage as part of the safety balancing, then it's got to be done under good laboratory practices, because --
 Suppose that we concluded -- well, I don't want to cut you off. Go ahead, please. If I cut you off.
 Yes. If -- I believe the Solicitor General's point is that the safety decision is a practical one, and you've got to look at both sides of the ledger -- potential harm, potential benefit -- I don't believe it's proper to call that "efficacy." But whatever you call it, if it's part of the safety balancing it has to be done under good laboratory procedures. That, I think, is clear from the FDA regulations. And, as a matter of policy, it wouldn't make any sense for the FDA to say that half of the safety equation need not be done under good laboratory practices. Both parts of the safety equation have to be done under that.
 I don't -- so what? I don't understand what conclusion that leads to.
 Well, Justice Scalia, let me say that I think that this whole discussion about the interpretation of the FDA law is really somewhat off the point here.
 I was beginning to think that, too. [Laughter.]
 And the reason I say that is because we're not here to judge the legality of an FDA action in its discretion, saying we want to consider preclinical --
 Yes, but the reason you brought it up is because the particular certificate that is for a safety-certified lab is not applicable to the lab that used this stuff. That's why you brought it up, I think.
 That is correct.
 And I understand that. And you'd have to conclude, for them to win -- but suppose I did conclude -- suppose, for hypothetical -- the sake of -- for -- as a hypothetical, suppose I thought, yes, this does include the safety part, looking at how effective drugs are, too. Suppose I concluded that the statute meant sometimes you could do that, in an ordinary laboratory that didn't have the special certificate? Suppose I concluded that, indeed, you could look well in advance of the clinical test period to get the information for the IND? And suppose I concluded that sometimes, where it was reasonably related, you could, in fact, look at other drugs, too, that are related to the ones you do. If I concluded that -- and I'm not saying I would -- then would you concede that a directed verdict would have been appropriate against you?
 No, Your Honor.
 Because? And what's your strongest argument that it wouldn't?
 Well, Your Honor, there's numerous admissions in the record that Merck made which would indicate that they've -- that the program carried out at Scripps was not reasonably related to the FDA, that the real FDA work was being done in Germany, that the majority of these experiments conducted by Scripps were conducted on chicken embryos, which Merck's own scientists agree have nothing to do with safety, and, by logical extension, they can't tell you much about efficacy, either. Merck agreed that a significant portion of these experiments in which Merck was looking for non-peptide compounds as possible drug candidates, is something that --
 Well, we don't -- I hope we don't have to, at this Court, look at all the evidence and try to sort it out that way. What we have to focus on is whether the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit was in error in articulating the scope of the exemption.
 Your Honor, this Court does not have to get into Rule 50 review of the evidence here --
 No.
 -- because there's no dispute about the legal standard. We've all heard that this morning. The only other possible issue is Rule 50 review. But Merck has failed --
 Well, I thought the issue was whether the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit correctly determined the scope of the exemption. If they were wrong about it, then it is open to us to correct that and send it back.
 Your Honor, the Federal Circuit didn't determine the scope of the invention. There's -- it's --
 Exemption. The statutory exemption. I thought that was what we were looking at.
 Yes, that's what I was referring to. The Federal Circuit didn't articulate a standard for that. The Federal Circuit approved the District Court's use of the Intermedics standard, under which preclinical experiments are potentially --
 Well, but it certainly thought that the FDA considers only safety, and nothing else, that it was directed at generic drugs, not others, and that there was a cutoff point earlier than that argued by the Government and the Petitioner for what is exempt preclinical trial information.
 The Federal Circuit's opinion, I believe -- the Federal Circuit's opinion rejects the rational predicate theory. It does not articulate an alternative standard to that. It merely --
 They spent about ten pages in the appendix trying to do that.
 But Federal Circuit didn't do that. That was discussion in there. It gave a lot of background about the statute, which may not have been necessary for its ultimate holding. But the Federal Circuit, when it comes down to it, didn't do anything other than approve the District Court's interpretation. Now, if the Federal Circuit did something different than that, which we just -- which is -- Integra does not believe is the case, its judgment should be upheld on the grounds articulated, that it could discern no error in the District Court's judgment -- in the District Court's denial of Merck's motion for judgment as a matter of law. To respond to one of Justice O'Connor's earlier questions, "Does this Court have to get into a Rule 50 review," the answer is no, because Merck failed to preserve its right to Rule 50 review. In the District Court, in the Federal Circuit, the -- Merck argued the rational predicate standard as a matter of law. That was rejected. Rule 50 review, under the Intermedics standard, is an entirely different argument, and Merck never raised that argument in -- before the Federal Circuit. In its brief, Merck relies, on pages 50 and 51 of its brief to the Federal Circuit, saying there it argued substantial evidence. But what it argued there was, the experiments are rational predicates. Merck never argued, before the Federal Circuit, that the verdict can't be sustained under Rule 50, under the Intermedics standard, as opposed to the rational predicate standard, so it's not entitled to that review here.
 The dissenting judge did not -- the dissenting judge, Judge Newman, did not read the Court's opinion the way you do. Is that correct?
 That is correct, Your Honor.
 Maybe we should take that into account, to some extent, that someone who participated on the bench had a different take on what her colleagues were saying?
 That is certainly a consideration, but we disagree with Judge Newman on that point.
 Is there a difference between you and Merck concerning the scope and extent of the common law research exemption? And if there is, does that even enter into our case?
 That issue hasn't entered into the case, so there's been no differences articulated, Your Honor. And to get back to the point that Merck did not preserve its right to Rule 50 review under the Intermedics standard, even if it had raised that issue before the Federal Circuit, clearly the Federal Circuit didn't reach that issue. And if the Federal Circuit didn't reach an issue that was properly presented before it, that was error, and Merck would have had to seek relief from that error. And it did not do so in its petition for certiorari. So, I do not believe this Court even needs to address the issue of Rule 50 review. There is no dispute in this case as to the substantive standard that governs the scope of Section 271(e)(1), and Merck, having failed to preserve its rights to Rule 50 review under the Intermedics standard, there his no controversy for this Court to decide. If the Court does reach the issue of Rule 50 review under Intermedics, it is -- the case should be decided under the basic principles that it is the exclusive province of the jury to weigh the evidence and to determine the credibility of the witnesses. And my time is up, but -- almost -- but I'll say one thing. After 25 days of trial, the District Judge, in his denial of Merck's motion for judgment as a matter of law, expressly said that the jury had reasonable cause to disregard the testimony of Merck's main witness, Dr. Cheresh. And, on that ground alone, the judgment of the Federal Circuit should be sustained. Merck can't be rescued from the jury's verdict unless this Court determines, as a matter of law, that the jury was required to believe the testimony of Dr. Cheresh. And Merck can't show that, and hasn't even attempted to show that. Unless there are any questions --
 Thank you, Mr. Flores. Mr. Rosenkranz, you have two minutes remaining.
 Thank you, Your Honor. With my two minutes, I want to make one overarching important point, and it's really in response to a question Justice Scalia asked. The emphasis in the statute is about the use, so let's get past labels about, Is this drug discovery or basic research, or is it, as Merck says, optimization on the lead drug candidate, and look at exactly what was occurring here. Here, this was not a, "Gee, we'd like to see what affects angiogenesis." Merck knew what affected angiogenesis. It had a structure. And if you look at page 42 of the supplemental appendix, you will see that structure. It knew exactly what that structure did and how it did it. It then tweaked it by changing, literally, three atoms to compare that activity with other activity, exactly the sorts of research that any drug innovator would do to verify that they have the best and most effective candidate. Then, with -- and with every single one of its experiments, it was examining information that was relevant to mechanism of action, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, and efficacy. With 10 percent of the experiments, it was also running them in parallel with a series of analogs that were designed to look exactly like the RGD peptides, and to work exactly like the RGD peptides. And no rational drug innovator ever proceeds to clinical trials, nor does the FDA want it to, without conducting that research, because you don't spend millions of dollars for expensive toxicology studies until you know you've got the safest and most effective drug candidate. The FDA reviews that evidence, because it wants to know why you're proceeding with that candidate. And if you shift midstream to another lead, as Merck, in fact, did in this very case, the FDA wants to understand why. So each of those experiments, even in comparison, developed information that is relevant to the FDA. Thank you, Your Honors.
 Thank you, Mr. Rosenkranz. The case is submitted.
 The Court will now hear argument in IBP, Inc. vs. Alvarez and Tum vs. Barber Foods, Inc. Mr. Phillips.
 Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: There are two issues in this case. One concerns walking time, and the other concerns waiting time. And unless the Court has a different order, I'd propose to start with the walking time. Section 4(a)(1)'s language, which comes from the Portal-to-Portal Act, which was enacted in 1947, by its plain terms clearly covers the walking that's involved in these two cases. The statute, which is reproduced at the appendix of the petition, at 88(a), says that there is no mandatory compensation for, quote, "walking to and from the actual place of performance of the principal activity or activities which such employee is employed to perform." It's difficult for me to imagine language that could more directly cover what we're dealing with in this particular case, because the Plaintiffs here are -- for IBP -- are employed to slaughter and to process beef. The employees at Barber Foods are employed to process chicken. And thus, the actual place where they perform those services are obviously on the lines where the processing takes place.
 I would have thought that, but we've held otherwise.
 Well, I don't know that we've -- I don't know of any case where this Court has held otherwise.
 Well, we've held that they're -- that the principal activity consists of doffing -- donning and doffing the clothes required, haven't we?
 Well, this Court said that donning and doffing was a principal activity in contradistinction to a preliminary or postliminary activity for purposes of section 4(a)(2), but the Court specifically said, in Steiner, that that holding does not apply to matters that are specifically excluded under section 4(a)(1), which deals with walking time, Justice Scalia.
 So, you think Steiner is irrelevant?
 For -- no, I don't think it's irrelevant to the workplace. I think it is irrelevant to the proper disposition of this case, yes.
 Well, it is if we don't accept the continuous workday rule. If we do accept the continuous workday rule, why isn't it, in effect, the premise from which the conclusion for the other side falls?
 Well, we don't have any quarrel with the continuous workday rule. The question is, When does the workday begin? And our assessment of the workday, as defined in section 4(a)(1), which controls, specifically, the walking time in this particular case, begins when you arrive at the actual place where you're going to perform the services --
 No, but your argument --
 -- or primary activities.
 -- assumes that there is only one actual place. And their argument, which is consistent with the text of the statute, is that there may be more than one principal activity, and hence, more than one place. And if the -- if the place of donning and doffing is such a place, then wouldn't it be at least administratively odd to apply the continuous workday rule immediately to exclude some walking time that follows that?
 No, I don't think so. I think it is perfectly sensible and a clear bright-line rule, Justice Souter, to say that when you arrive at the actual place where you perform, not just any activities, and not just the activities that are integral and indispensable to your working activities, but to the principal activities for which you're hired -- and, admittedly, there can be more than one of those, but that doesn't -- you know, donning and doffing is not a principal activity --
 So, you're saying that --
 -- of anyone who's cutting beef.
 -- so-called "integral activities" are not principal activities.
 Right. They don't have to principal activities. They're better understood as --
 They felt otherwise.
 Mr. Phillips, I -- the Steiner opinion explicitly agreed with the lower court in that case, which said that the term "principal activity or activities" embraces all activities that are integral and indispensable.
 Right.
 And if -- if you think that putting on the clothes fall within that, then that covers walking, too --
 It --
 -- after that.
 The problem with that analysis is that the court was only analyzing section 4(a)(2) for these purposes. And what it was saying is, "We are prepared to accept that there are certain activities that are either preliminary or postliminary, and then there are others that are primary activities. And if you are integral and indispensable to a primary activity, it is a compensable event." Recognizing that Steiner is probably the most extraordinarily extreme facts that you could imagine, because we're talking about clothings that had -- clothing that had to be changed in order to protect the public --
 But, Mr. Phillips --
 -- health and safety.
 -- you're asking us to interpret the same words, "principal activity or activities," differently in sub (2) that was at issue in Steiner, and in sub (1), and then the clause that follows both of those. The same phrase is used. So if "principal activity" includes donning or doffing, under sub (2), why wouldn't the same follow for sub (1) and the following clauses?
 Because you have to read the language "principal activity or activities" in (a)(1) within the context of what Congress was trying to achieve by the Portal-to-Portal Act, which was to absolutely and categorically exclude walking time from being part of mandatorily compensated activities of a particular employee.
 But it is included if it's -- once the workday begins, if there's a rotation, you walk from one station to the other. That walking time, I think it's conceded, would be included.
 Right. But that --
 So, if your date -- if the principal activity is donning and doffing, then the walking time thereafter would also be included.
 But, Justice Ginsburg, if you step back and think about this language in the context of the words that are written here, it says, "walking to and from the actual place of performance of the principal activity." No one would think that that --
 "Or activities."
 Or activities. But, again, Justice Souter, all that suggests is that there are times when somebody who's working in a clothing operation may -- you know, may spend time distributing the cloth or may spend time actually sewing the cloth. Those are two separate activities. They're different activities. But it doesn't mean -- and it certainly doesn't convert anything that had -- can be described as "integral and indispensable" into a primary activity which such employee is employed to perform. No employee, in these cases, was employed to perform the act of putting on clothes or the act of picking up equipment.
 What do you think about the possibility, "it depends on the clothes and depends on the equipment," so that, in Steiner and here, it's a lot of protective gear, it's really quite part of the job and special and unusual. In Mt. Clemens, it's a kind of uniform. It's just washing your hands up, putting on an apron. So, where it's minor putting on clothes, as someone might in his house, doesn't come in substantial, doesn't come in integral and indispensable; but where it's quite a big deal, it does. And who decides? The agency.
 Well, there are two parts about that that are worth focusing on. One is, I don't think you can lump the two cases together, because the clothing or the equipment that has to be put on with respect to the Barber Foods company is barely -- is quite minimal and, indeed, was deemed to be diminimus. So, I'm not -- I'm not sure you can lump the two cases together in that way. But also, in terms of where the Secretary comes out on this, let's not forget 79.7(g), footnote 49, which is, candidly, the clearest statement from the Secretary with respect to, What do you do when you have donning and doffing that is followed by walking time? And what does the -- and what does the regulation specifically say? And that's on, I think, 92 and 93 of the appendix to our petition. It specifically says that that walking time is not excluded, not necessarily --
 Not necessarily excluded. It's really noncommittal on the point.
 Well, except that, under their theory of this case, it is always excluded. Always. So that whatever else you can say about the meaning of that particular language, the interpretation the Secretary offers to you today flatly rejects --
 But "in certain" --
 -- that language.
 -- that footnote -- that's where I actually got the idea -- it says, "We reserve, in certain situations." To me, that meant sometimes it can be a major big deal to don clothing -- protective gear; sometimes it isn't -- an apron. And whose job is it? Now I'm repeating myself.
 Right.
 The Secretary's.
 No, but -- and if we were talking about that in the context of other kinds of activities -- if you're back in the (a)(2) world of looking at whether something's preliminary or postliminary, I have less of a problem with dealing with that. The problem is, here we're talking about (a)(1) activities, the core of what Congress enacted the Portal-to-Portal Act to protect employers for. The Portal-to-Portal Act is not a statute that remotely provides protections for the employees. This is a statute that was designed to protect employers from billions of dollars of liability. And so, when you're talking about, "Under what circumstances can you ignore the flat prohibition on requiring walking time to be regarded as a mandatory subject of compensation?" then it seems to me the distinction you're proposing doesn't work. And it's also, Justice Breyer, again, flatly inconsistent. Their -- that's not their theory of the case. Their theory of the case is, "If we can describe it as in any way integral and indispensable to some other activity, that makes it a primary activity, that starts the workday, and everything after that then becomes compensable."
 Mr. Phillips, can I call your attention to the text of Section 254(a)? It's in the red brief in the Alvarez case, at App. 1. What it -- what it says is that you don't have to pay overtime compensation or minimum wages for and on account of any of the following activities: (1) "walking, riding," blah, blah, blah. This is (1).
 Yes.
 -- for the "place of performance of the principal activity or activities which such employee is employed to perform."
 Now you skipped over "actual place," there --
 Right. Okay.
 -- Justice Scalia, but -- which I think is an important --
 Okay.
 -- word.
 (2) "activities which are preliminary to or postliminary to said principal activity or activities." You're trying to sever (1) and (2), when the text itself joins them. The activities referred to in (2) are "said principal activity or activities." The "said" refers to the ones that are in (1).
 Right. But that --
 How can we possibly sever (1) and (2) and say that for purposes of one, it means one thing; for purposes of two, it means something else?
 Because when the court was interpreting (a)(2) in Steiner, it wasn't interpreting (a)(2) to determine whether something was a postliminary activity in connection with "said preliminary -- primary activities." What it was saying is, these are not preliminary and postliminary activities, that they are excluded from that. And so, the court's really coming up with what is a third category of cases, which deals with integral and indispensable activities to a primary activity. They didn't have to analyze it as a primary activity. All they had to say was, it's not -- that the preliminary and postliminary activities are not simply temporal, that there is a substantive component to it. And that is essentially the holding of the court in Steiner. It says there's a substantive component; and, therefore, we're not going to just simply look in -- time-wise, whether it comes before or after principal activities. We're going to decide that there are some -- there are some situations that are so important that they need to be compensated under (a)(2), because they don't fall within preliminary or postliminary language.
 But, Mr. Phillips, it says it -- either something is before, preliminary; or after, postliminary. And if it's neither of those, then, it seems to me, it fits -- it's not before the principal activity, and it's not after the principal activity, so what else is it, other than the --
 It's work --
 -- principal activity?
 -- that's mandatorily compensable under the Fair Labor Standards Act. Remember, the Fair Labor Standards Act, under this Court's interpretations from Mt. Clemens Pottery and the cases that preceded it, I mean, it -- you know, it had a very sweeping definition of what is work within the meaning -- within the meaning of what is compensable as minimum wages and as overtime. And that's in place. And now Congress has stepped in and said, "Well, wait a second. When we did it -- when that got interpreted that broadly, we're talking about $6 billion in liability." So, it's very important, given that we're talking about fairly minimal activities on the -- on the -- that are involved here, triggering potentially massive liabilities. And so, what we've done is, we've excluded from those massive liabilities the walking, riding, and traveling time, because that's the basis on which you end up with big numbers.
 So, your approach introduces, really, a third concept. You have the principal activities and you have -- either preliminary or postliminary -- and now you've got a third concept: integral. But the statute -- that's nowhere in the statute.
 Right. Well, I mean, that -- but that's -- this Court's decision in Steiner was the one that reached out to decide that "integral and indispensable" was a category of activities that were going to be compensable, even though, on the face of them, they may have appeared to be --
 Well, unless they were saying those activities were, in fact, principal activities. If it's integral, if it's embraced by the principal activity, it is a principal activity, and that at least is more consistent with the statute in keeping it in two categories rather than inventing a third.
 Well, I don't think that creates any particular problem, but what you end up doing, Mr. Chief Justice, under those circumstances, is, you completely eliminate the protection that Congress meant to provide here for walking, riding, and traveling time, which is -- which is a vital consideration --
 Well, how does -- how does your analysis apply? Let's say these employees had to change their equipment several times during the course of the day.
 You mean after they've --
 Yes, I mean, the --
 -- arrived at the actual place --
 -- the equipment is only good for, you know, an hour, two hours, then they have to get new ones. They have to walk back to the place --
 Right.
 -- they have to doff the other equipment, don new equipment, and walk back. Wouldn't your analysis say that that walking time is excluded?
 No. No. Once you --
 Why not?
 We don't have any quarrel with the argument that once you, for the first time, arrive at your actual place of performing the principal activity for which you were hired, which is cutting beef or whatever it happens to be in your hypothetical -- once you arrive there, that does begin the workday. That's the definition of what starts the workday, which is why I -- to our mind, this is a much clearer and brighter-line rule. We can tell you precisely when you start the workday. It's when you get to the place where you got hired to work, and start to do that work.
 But do you have compensated activities that do not begin the workday?
 Yes, you do have compensated -- and that's true for lots of different situations, Justice Kennedy. You could have a situation where you go home, and you get called back in on an emergency, and nobody disputes that that's clearly compensable time, and nobody has ever seriously argued that you ought to extend the workday --
 What happens with the microchip or a laboratory with highly contagious viruses where there's got to be two hours of scrubbing and then there's a walk? What do you do with that?
 If the --
 Two hours of scrubbing --
 You know, it's -- it's very possible that the scrubbing will be regarded as an integral and indispensable part of the -- of the -- of the employment, and --
 But then there's -- but then there's --
 -- therefore, it's compensable.
 -- but then there's a walk. What about the walk?
 The walk is not compensable, because Congress didn't want you to have walking until you got to the actual place where you would perform the services. And nobody's principal activity as an employee is to go take a shower or to go and pick up certain types of clothing. That's not --
 But the problem --
 -- the understanding of "principal activity."
 Mr. Phillips, the problem I continue to have is that I thought Steiner embraced, explicitly, the notion that principal activity embraces all activities that are integral and indispensable. You take issue with that, but do you want us to overrule Steiner --
 No.
 -- or make some changes in it? I just don't understand.
 I want you to limit Steiner to the very unusual facts that arose in that particular context. I -- we don't have any quarrel with the "indispensable and integral" test as a reason for beginning -- as a reason for compensating certain activities.
 What was --
 What we do --
 -- so unusual about the facts --
 I'm sorry?
 What was so unusual about the facts in Steiner? They're pretty common.
 Well, no, I -- the notion that if you didn't shower and change, you would expose not only yourself, but your family and everybody else to the risks of lead poisoning is a pretty extraordinary --
 No, but the --
 -- circumstance.
 -- the routine where you have to don, you know, safety equipment, and you have to shower when you're done, whether it's being -- the meatpacking or the stuff at Steiner -- that's a pretty common occurrence.
 Right, well, I would -- I would argue that you could make a -- you could make a claim that none of that donning and doffing ought to be compensable. And, candidly, we've made that argument. But, unfortunately, the court didn't grant the petition on that particular -- on that particular question. So, we have to take it as a given. But I don't -- I don't -- I -- for exactly the reason you identify, Mr. Chief Justice, that does create a problem. I mean, part of this problem is a bit contrived. I don't think that the ordinary donning and doffing ought to trigger the beginning of the workday. But, assuming that it does --
 But you're saying --
 -- I still don't think -- I'm sorry, Justice Souter.
 No, no, I didn't mean -- finish.
 But I still don't think that, even if you accept that that is compensable conduct within the meaning of Steiner, which I -- that's what it's talking about -- but Steiner, Justice O'Connor, doesn't say anything about the fact that there was going to have to be walking or traveling, or the workday. The court, in Steiner, clearly had in mind the workplace, where you're producing batteries. There's a lot of language in that opinion that says, "This is where you really do the work. That's your battery, and here's where you're going to get -- engage in activities that we think you need to be compensated." But the court never remotely suggested that you were entitled to the walking time between those two. And, if you go back to 790.7(g), that language specifically told every employer that simply because you have to pay for certain kinds of activities at the outset, because they're integral and indispensable, as decided by a court, that doesn't necessarily mean you have to pay for all the walking time. And so, you've got to come up with --
 You would say that's --
 -- a theory that supports that.
 -- so for all activities that are -- that are integral and indispensable? What about sharpening tools?
 Well, sharpening tools is the easiest one, because you do that right on your workplace. I mean, that's exactly what Congress had in mind in its legislative history --
 No, no, no.
 But your --
 But that's -- but suppose --
 -- but your time shouldn't start from then.
 -- that's not the hypothetical. Suppose you sharpen the tools outside, by your locker, and then you -- then you go for a 10-minute walk to get to the -- and you carry the sharpened tool?
 Well, again, if the Court decided that sharpening the tools, even though it's done not at the same time, which is what Congress had in mind when it -- when it identified that hypothetical -- but, even if you assume that, that that's integral and indispensable, it still isn't what triggers the time for starting the actual employment.
 No, but isn't your -- in the answer that you just gave, and an answer which you have, in fact, consistently repeated, inconsistent with Steiner -- Steiner didn't say there is a separate category of integral activities. Steiner said that activities which are integral are part of the principal activity. And isn't your argument premised on denying that identity?
 No, I can accept that identity for purposes of distinguishing between what's preliminary and postliminary activity. What I cannot do is to -- is embrace that for purposes of deciding when walking time/traveling time ought to be included. Congress was as plain as it could humanly be in saying that, "We're not going to allow walking and traveling time to be included in an unexpected fashion." And that is precisely -- as the Chamber of Commerce brief says, that is precisely what we're talking about here. And, candidly, as Judge Boudin said in his concurring opinion, the circumstances arising in this context bear a very eery resemblance to the situation that gave rise to the Portal-to-Portal Act in the first place. And so -- and I think it's important to put this into context. You know, the language of the statute, as I read it, clearly is in our favor. The purpose of the statute is clearly in our favor. And then the question is, Did this Court, in a decision that dealt solely with 4(a)(2), mean to vastly change the scope of 4(a)(1) in a way that would dramatically expose employers to liability --
 Why is it --
 -- and --
 -- why is it so dramatic, if we recognize that nothing begins until the donning and doffing -- that is, the travel to wherever you don and doff?
 Well --
 None of that is included, even from the plant gate to the place where you don and doff.
 But the -- well, in part, because plants are not -- have never been designed -- remember, we've got 79.6 -- the Secretary of Labor told employers for 50 years, "You can set up your plant without fearing that you're going to suddenly be hit with walking time after somebody engages in donning and doffing, even if it turns out to be integral and indispensable." For 50 years, they followed that advice. They set up all of their plants with that expectation. And now this Court, if it follows the ninth circuit's lead, will suddenly say, "Okay, what you need to go out and find is all of the integral and indispensable activities" -- not just donning and doffing -- any integral and indispensable activity that you can get a court to buy into, that will start this ever-expanding workday, such that any walking that goes on after that and before you get done with all of these ever-expanding post-doffing activities. Then you have the -- that's -- you know, so you have this broad -- and that's why you're going to have these -- substantially greater and totally unexpected liabilities on the workplace.
 Where is that advice contained, that you say was given to --
 790.7(g), footnote 49, and it says, as --
 Not --
 -- plain as day --
 -- not necessarily.
 Right, but -- there -- there, it means always. Always.
 And you say that they operated on the assumption that it meant never.
 No, I'm prepared to --
 It seems to me they were on notice that, although it did not, necessarily, it might. I think you're --
 It might, and -- but --
 -- you're exaggerating the effect of that statement.
 But, Justice Scalia --
 That's right, they don't say -- I mean, they exclude, for example, the canine cases, where you have to walk and feed the dog in the morning before you show up at work. So --
 Well, the --
 -- they're not saying only --
 -- the Secretary does. I don't know whether the plaintiffs necessarily do. And certainly the plaintiffs in those cases didn't. They took the position that the workday started as soon as you engaged in protecting the canines, just as in -- insurance industry, they -- the insurance adjusters are all taking the position that as soon as they have to get on the computer, that's an integral and indispensable part of their day, and everything after that, including traveling and movement, are all part and parcel of what gets added in there. What I'm suggesting to you is that once you go down this path and you say, "Okay, we're going to define the workday by reference to whatever somebody determines is integral and indispensable," you are going to have an expandable workday, and that if you are really looking for a fairly clear rule, you sit -- you stick with what the language of the statute says, which is, the actual place of the performance of the activity for which you were hired. Once you've got that in place -- that's not to say that's the full length of when you get compensated. You can be compensated for activities outside of that workday. Happens every day, when you have to come in for an emergency or if you have to come in --
 My problem with your argument is Steiner.
 I understand the problem with Steiner, Justice Kennedy, but I think it is inappropriate to read Steiner, which says, point-blank, "Our holding does not deal with conduct that is specifically excluded by 4(a)(1)," and then -- and ignore that. That whole -- that statement of the holding of the court seems to me to say, "All we're telling you the answer to" --
 No, it doesn't.
 -- "is 4(a)(2)."
 The only thing specifically included in (a)(1) is walking, riding, or traveling to and from the actual place of performance of the principal activity or activities. And once you assume that "principal activity or activities" includes everything that's integral and essential to principal activities, (a)(1) doesn't cover it.
 No, you can get to the logic of that. The question is, Is it appropriate to apply the "integral and indispensable" test, which is an atextual standard, in a way that essentially guts 4(a)(1) and the fundamentally important values that it was designed to serve? And what I'm suggesting to you is, that's a mistake. And we know that, because the regs protected us against this precise event. It is exactly what the Portal-to-Portal Act was designed to accomplish, and it's the better interpretation of this particular statute.
 Mr. Phillips, may I just ask you a preliminary question about the IBM case -- IP -- IBP --
 IBP.
 -- IBP case? As I understand it, whatever we do here is irrelevant to what the bottom line is going to be in that case, because the determination is going to be made only under State law. The court below said that's what it was going to do. And the employees are not objecting. So, it seems that that case, as distinguished from Tum, is really not anything that this Court should decide, because it would be academic.
 Well, they don't argue that it's moot. And it's not purely academic. There are collateral consequences to deciding what the Federal law issue is in this particular context. We briefed this issue at the cert stage at some length, and the court granted cert, so I'm assuming that, in some respects, you, sort of, pass by that particular problem. There are collateral consequences. And the other side, again, doesn't say it's -- that it has mooted this case; it simply says that there's this serious issue on remand as to precisely how it'll all play out.
 Could you give us a collateral consequence? I mean that is --
 Yes, because it -- reas judicata collateral estoppel effects from the ruling that we've -- that we have violated federal law, both that might be available to the Secretary of Labor and otherwise. If there are no further questions, I'll reserve the --
 Thank you, Mr. Phillips.
 -- balance of my minutes.
 Mr. Goldstein.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: As the previous questioning suggests, the outcome of this case follows directly from Steiner. The Portal Act, by its terms, applies only to activities that occur before the commencement of -- before the commencement of, or after the conclusion of, the employees' principal activities. Steiner holds that donning and doffing, such as in this case, is "part of" -- that's a quote -- the employees' principal activities, and it, therefore, follows that the Portal Act applies only to activities either prior to, or after, that donning and doffing.
 But why isn't walking from the gate of the -- of the factory to the -- to the place where you're on the assembly line, why isn't that integral and essential to the performing of the activities?
 Because -- and this is the language that Mr. Phillips is referring to in Steiner -- 4(a)(1) itself makes clear that a walk will not be the first principal activity, including on the theory that it's integral and indispensable. The first principal activity has to be something other than a walk, and that's what happens in this case. As in Steiner, there is donning at the beginning of the day. That's part of the principal activities --
 No, no, but if -- once you accept the theory that the principal activity includes those things that are integral, you can say walking from the gate of the plant to the assembly line is part of the principal activity. Now, walking to the gate may not be part of the -- may not be part of the principal activity, but -- I --
 Two reasons, Justice Scalia. The first is the one that I gave, and that is, the Steiner Court concluded that -- and that was the end of the sentence, where it said, "except as excluded by 4(a)(1)," that Congress made clear in 4(a)(1) -- that the initial walk wouldn't be the first principal activity. Second, the walk won't be integral and indispensable. The test for whether or not something is integral and indispensable is whether it's work that's required and closely related to the productive activities. And simply walking to the donning station is not. That's in contradistinction to putting on the clothes that are required here, required as a matter of law in order to do your job. That's the line that the statute draws.
 Well, what about the dog grooming cases?
 The dog cases, Justice Kennedy -- and I -- let me make sure we're -- I have your hypothetical, and that is, the police officer at home grooms the dog --
 Yes.
 -- then comes into the office. That is part of their principal activities. The subsequent commute is not compensable, on the ground that it is a break and a commute. That's covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. The Portal Act is concerned with something else -- that is, before the beginning and after the end of your day. The dog cases are, of course, also entirely different from this one. You have -- you have arrived at the place of the performance of your principal activity. Steiner said that occurred, quote/unquote, "on or off the production floor." And so, you're at the plant, and your workday has started. Justice Scalia, you made the point, and I simply want to reinforce it, that the reference in -- to "principal activities" in 4(a)(2) is the same as the reference to "principal activities" in 4(a)(1), but it's also the reference to principal activities in the concluding clause of section 4. If I could just take the Court to that. The statute is obviously reproduced in a variety of places, but it's also at page 3 of our brief. And so, after 4(a)(1) and 4(a)(2), there's this concluding clause, and the text frames the workday. And it says that the Portal Act, 4(a)(1) and (2), will apply to activities which occur -- I'm quoting now -- "which occur either prior to the time on any particular workday at which such employee commences, or subsequent to the time on any particular workday at which he ceases, such principal activity or activities." And it simply follows, as a matter of the plain text, that when Steiner held that those activities, "such principal activities," include the donning and the doffing, that everything that happens between those two events is not encompassed by the Portal Act.
 Your --
 What if -- what if --
 -- answer to Justice Kennedy said that the dog cases were distinguishable because there was a break in the principal activity. So, if we were to rule in your favor, all the employer has to do is make sure that the donning and doffing station's far enough away from the production line so that there will be a sufficient break between the two activities.
 Well, the -- both the donning and the doffing and the walking in between and the wait for the equipment, which is the bulk of the time in all these cases, would be compensable. The Department of Labor has regulations --
 What do you mean "it would be" -- that's my question.
 Yes. I'm sorry, Mr. Chief Justice. There -- the donning and doffing in the Alvarez case, by and large, happens in one place: in a locker room. In the Tum case, by contrast, the employees show up at a cage, they wait for things, they walk, they pick up something else, they wait, they pick up something else. And so, there's a body of time that I refer to as the donning and doffing process. All of that would clearly be compensable, even in your hypothetical. Your hypothetical would address the final piece of time, and that is, you get your last piece of clothing on, and you have to go to the floor, and the employer could say, "Take a 15 minute break," in there. I suppose that's hypothetically possible. I think the reason it doesn't happen in these cases and in the other cases I've studied is that the employer has an incentive, when they're forced to compensate, to do things efficiently. What happens is, the employer will say, "All right, your shift is going to start at 6:30 in the morning; therefore, you can clock in and start donning at 6:23." That's a 7-minute window, and that forces the employees to do everything efficiently. They don't insert artificial breaks.
 Yes, but why -- if you're talking about efficiency, it may well be that the employees, instead of imposing upon the employer the costs of moving the donning and doffing location closer to the -- to the place where the real work is being done, they might prefer, instead, to get a slight salary increase per hour. But -- and that is -- that is possible, under the petitioner's scheme, because it is left to private negotiation; whereas, what you say is that they must pay for that. They must pay for that walk from the donning and doffing. They cannot negotiate out of it, because if it's in the Fair Labor Standards Act, it is mandatory. So I -- don't talk to us about efficiency. It seems to me that the efficiency arguments are on the other side. Leave it to the private sector. The employers -- the employees can decide what they care more about.
 Well, Justice Scalia, I -- all I have in -- before me that I can rely on is the statute that Congress enacted. Your point would cover, of course, equally, the donning and doffing in Steiner itself. Congress made some choices about things that were going to be compensable. It's worth noting that Congress drew a line about whether -- in terms of whether there was a collective bargaining agreement involved, because under section 203(o) of the statute, in workplaces covered by a collective bargaining agreement, you can negotiate out of at least clothes changing. But I think within the framework of the statute that we do have, I am actually quite correct, and that is, right now, today, the employers have no incentive to adopt an efficient scheme for arranging donning and doffing. They can put things in different buildings if they like. The employees here are required to spend 10 or 20 minutes waiting for different clothing at different times, depending on how long the lines are. It is a workable scheme that Congress designed that said, "We're going to have a workday." And the employer is in charge of deciding when the workday begins or ends, but, during that workday, they're going to have to pay. I did want to --
 Mr. Goldstein, I just wanted to have a clear answer to the question Justice Scalia asked you. Is it so that collective bargaining could not trade off the compensation for the walking and the donning and doffing for some other benefit that the employees might prefer?
 Justice Ginsburg, it is an unsettled question, is the answer. I will give you the best answer I can. 203(o) allows for the negotiation away of clothes changing time. The question whether clothes-changing time includes safety equipment is a matter in dispute. The ninth circuit held that it didn't. This Court denied certiorari on that question. The further question, if you did negotiate away the clothes changing time, whether that would negotiate away the walking and waiting time has not been confronted by a court, so far as I am aware. It might be said to logically follow, but it hasn't been decided. It's not presented by this case, because cert was denied. And so, I haven't thought very much --
 So, you say it's an open question.
 It is. I'm confident it's an open question.
 What --
 Could --
 -- about what gear qualifies? That is, here we have no dispute that this is protective gear. But it's not any changing that counts. So, how do we know whether this is the kind of donning and doffing that's compensated in -- or the kind that isn't?
 The line that has been drawn by the Department of Labor, is where I will start, and the Department of Labor -- and let me give you some citations -- says that the line is between whether the employer requires you to do the donning and doffing on the plant or not. The citations for that are section 785.24(c) of the regulations, 790, note 65. And then it contrasts clothes-changing that's by your own choice, in 790.7(g). I think that's a sensible line, but it's not presented by this case. Justice Breyer, it goes to your characterization of the final sentence of footnote 49, and that is: sometimes. The reason I think it's sensible to draw the line that the Department has in required clothes changing is that the employer will only require you to do it onsite if it is truly integral and indispensable to your job; otherwise, it'll be optional, or they'll let you do it at --
 Can I ask you about a -- the other part of the case? I mean, I think, as I've suggested, most of these things are up to the agency. They're minor things in law, so -- but it seems well established in the agency reg, as well as in Skidmore, the famous line about waiting being, "Are you waiting to be engaged, or are you engaged to wait?" So, assuming that this is just putting on and off clothes that are essential -- so, assume you win on that part -- when they wait to put on the clothes, you would think -- if it's like an airport, sometimes you wait; if you're lucky, you don't. Well, under those circumstances, you wouldn't be engaged to wait. You're waiting to put on the clothes, not -- you know, etcetera -- so, why would you win on that part?
 Can I, again, make sure I have the hypothetical in terms -- we are, in a sense, talking about the first wait. You show up at the first --
 The -- what happens -- you win on the --
 Yes.
 -- clothes. They're protected gear. That's the assumption. That's part of the job. The workday begins. But you have to get there, and you wait to get the clothes. On that --
 But --
 -- one, why not Skidmore? Why not the reg? And, if so, why don't you lose on that one?
 You are -- in that situation, you're waiting for the very first piece of equipment. In the Tum case, you show up at the cage at the beginning of the day. You are engaged to wait. The regulatory citations are two: 790.6(b) and 790.7(h). There's also a case that's confronted this, which is the Metzler case, 127 F.3d 959. All those authorities make clear that if the employer tells you, "Show up to do something, show up here to put on your clothes," and, because of the way the employer has designed the system, you have to wait, through no fault of your own --
 But suppose sometimes you have to wait? Sometimes it's a minute, sometimes it's nothing. Is it like an airport? Or does the employer here say, "You must show up seven minutes early, because there'll be a wait"?
 It's the -- it would be the same result whether the employer puts a time on it or not. The employer says -- I'll give you an example we could agree on, when it's a time --
 Is that what the reg says?
 The reg doesn't --
 It's surprising I didn't see that in the reg, if it says that.
 The regulation gives this example, which I think is on point, and that is, if you are told to show up for when the production begins -- the meat's going to come across -- and the machine breaks down or they simply don't start sending the meat until five minutes later, the fact is that you get compensated, because you're supposed to be there. The fact that they tell you, "Be there for the" --
 Where it's first in the day.
 Yes.
 First thing --
 Yes.
 -- in the day.
 Yes. Unquestionably.
 I thought you would say that the whole principle of, you know, "Are you engaged to wait, or waiting to be engaged?" just contradicts the principle that was adopted in Steiner. I mean, are you putting -- are you employed to put on your -- to put on your clothes, or are you putting on your clothes to do your work? And Steiner essentially repudiates that. So, you know, let's forget about Skidmore.
 Well, Justice Scalia, I think Justice Breyer is testing a very particular piece of time.
 No, I understand.
 He's trying to say, What is -- let me take you to the text of the statute --
 No, I --
 The -- he's trying to figure out when the -- the final clause of 4(a) talks about commencement -- he want to know when it commences. Does it commence when you get in line or when you --
 Right.
 -- first get the piece of clothes? It's a fair question. The other side hasn't made any argument that it doesn't include the first wait, I think, because you're told that you have to don, it's part of your principal activity. Let me also say, this, I think, is a somewhat academic question when it comes to -- and nothing against academics, but the -- it's a somewhat academic question when it comes to actual workplaces, because what happens is what I described before, the employers, under employers that are following our rule, do set up a time clock, and they say, "Show up at 6:23, and that's when you can clock in." They have computerized swipe cards, and the computer won't recognize them until 6:23. And it's the time after that that will be compensable. So, if the Court were to say the donning and doffing process starts and ends the workday for purposes of the Portal Act, everyone will understand what the --
 That wasn't decided below, was it? It was just a question of walking and waiting, and they weren't specific about whether that included waiting or walking, predonning.
 That's right. The reason for that is, there isn't a predonning wait in the Alvarez case, where the plaintiffs won, and the Tum plaintiffs lost on an unrelated theory that the actual donning and doffing couldn't start the workday.
 So, perhaps we shouldn't reach a question that hasn't been aired and decided below.
 And my formulation, which is simply the donning and doffing process, would, in fact, leave the -- to the lower courts the question of precisely when donning begins and doffing ends. That's a fair point.
 Mr. Goldstein, since you display such respect for the agency here -- [Laughter.]
 -- what do you do about the agency's footnote that flatly contradicts your theory of the case, and which says that the mere fact that donning and doffing may require compensation does not necessarily mean that travel between the clothes changing place and the actual place of performance would be excluded?
 Justice Scalia, my answer, I think, is that -- you had it right in the first half hour, and that is, that phrase -- [Laughter.]
 -- "not necessarily," can mean one of two things; i.e., we're denying that it follows a fortiori, or we're simply not deciding the question. The agency itself, which -- the Secretary wrote this guidance -- the agency explains that it meant that we're simply not deciding it. That's actually perfectly intelligible and a correct understanding of the history. Remember, the Portal Act gets enacted, and, right afterwards, the Secretary issues this guidance that then gets put in the CFR. This was their first reaction to the Act. Subsequently, after several years, these are -- what you're referring to is something in the -- what are known as the Part 790 guidance. Later on, the Secretary issued what's called the Part 785 guidance. And, in 785.3, it said, anything that, in 785, contradicts 790, controls. And 785.38 is the relevant citation. And there they say, "If you show up at the beginning of the day and you're given instructions, or you show up at the beginning of the day and you get a set of tools, what follows after that, in terms of travel time, is compensable." Can I answer two -- make two other very quick points? Justice Ginsburg, you asked about mootness. I would refer you to the Deposit Guarantee case, 445 U.S. 326, which talks about collateral estoppel effects. There is ongoing litigation against this defendant on this question, a case called Chavez, in the district court. The citation for the proposition that it will collaterally estop them is the restatement section of judgments, section --
 I wasn't questioning that, so much as it is -- it is extraordinary for this Court to take a case when the bottom line is going to be the same. And, since we have the identical issues, with no such preliminary question in Tum, if we decide in your favor in the Tum case, then the other case is taken care of.
 It's true, you could dig the case. My only point is that it is not moot. And perhaps the variety of workplaces shown in the two cases would illustrate things for the lower courts. I suspect that may have been why the Court granted cert. I also wanted to respond to the suggestion that this is a surprise to industry, with just a couple of citations. Walking and waiting time has been held compensable since at least 1961. The Mitchell case, 286 F.2d 721, the Barrentine case, 750 F.2d 47. There was a meatpacking plant at least seven years ago, 127 F.3d 959. And this has been the agency's enforcement position at least since the late 1980s. It's sufficiently settled that the court of appeals here held that IBP's failure to pay for this time was a willful violation of the statute. If there are no further questions.
 Thank you, Mr. Goldstein. Mr. Gornstein.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: The Portal Act excludes walking time from compensation only when it occurs outside the workday, before an employee commences, or after he ceases, his principal activities. And Steiner held that the term "principal activities" includes activities that are an integral and indispensable part of the principal activities. It follows that when donning and doffing are integral and indispensable parts of the principal activities of the employees, then walking that occurs after donning, and before doffing, occurs within the workday, and it is not excluded from compensation by the Portal Act. Now, the employers in these cases have argued that the term "principal activities" does not encompass activities that are integral and indispensable parts thereof, and that Steiner did not so hold. But, at the very outset of its opinion, the Court, in Steiner, posed the question presented as whether changing clothes and showering are compensable as part of the employee's principal activities, and had answered that question several pages later by stating that it agreed with the conclusion of the court of appeals in that case that the term "principal activities" includes activities that are an integral and indispensable part of the principal activities, and that the activities in question in that case fit within that description. Now, that was the only textual basis on which the Court could have reached the conclusion that it did, because, if the only principal activities in that case had occurred on the production floor, then the changing of clothes at the beginning of the day, and the showering at the end of the day, necessarily would have been preliminary to and postliminary to said principal activities, and thereby expressly excluded from compensation.
 What if I think that opinion was just flatly wrong, that Congress, when it referred to the "principal activity or activities," was talking about the cutting of the meat or whatever the employer hired the person to do? He didn't hire him to put on clothes. What if I think that? Why do I have to extend what I think to be an erroneous decision beyond its narrow holding?
 Justice Scalia, we are not asking for an extension of what you would regard as an erroneous holding. All we're saying is that you read the term "principal activities" as the Court interpreted it in Steiner. Once you do that, and you plug it into the statute, the plain language of the statute takes over, because it says that walking is only excluded when it comes before the employee commences, or after he ceases, the principal activities. Once you plug "integral and indispensable" into that sentence, as Steiner requires, then you are -- the plain language of the statute tells you that that time is not -- is compensable when it occurs after donning and before doffing.
 Why can't I say that Steiner requires that interpretation of what constitutes a "principal activity" only for purposes of determining what is compensable, and that when we -- when we come to examine the separate question, of when the workday begins, we can -- we can apply, as far as precedent is concerned, a different interpretation of what is a "principal activity"?
 Because the term "principal activity," I believe, as, you yourself, pointed out, is listed in the first -- at (a)(1). That's the first place it appears. Everywhere else it appears, including in (a)(2) and in the concluding sentence, it says "said principal activities." So, the statute itself tells you that the term "principal activities" has to mean the same thing everywhere it appears. And since you have already interpreted that term, in Steiner, to include "integral and indispensable activities," that terminology has to appear everywhere in the statute.
 Mr. Gornstein, do you agree that just because it's a compensable activity doesn't necessarily mean that there isn't going to be a break in the workday? People have talked about the dog example, and there are others. I mean, and -- so, all you're talking about is the determination that this is a principal activity. It seems that there's a separate -- second question, which is, How do we tell if the space in time between two different principal activities, and they're two very different types of activities, is a break or part of the continuous workday?
 Well, first of all, that question arises not under the Portal Act, which only applies before the principal activities begin and after they end, but under the Fair Labor Standards Act, itself. And that question would be governed by the Court's prior decisions on what constitutes hours worked, together with the Department of Labor's regulations that address what constitute hours worked. And -- within the workday -- and what the Department of Labor has said is, generally, everything within the workday is compensable, except for a meal period and except for a time period where there is a break that is so substantial that the employees can effectively use that time for their own purposes. And so, it says things like 5- to 20-minute breaks are not periods where the employee is not working, but they are resting for the further work. That is common in the industry. And so, that would be an issue that would arise when you had a break that was much longer than that, probably at least a half hour, where you can actually effectively use that time for your own purposes and are not required, essentially, to stay around on the employer's premises and to wait or rest to begin your work anew. So --
 I take it you then agree that the answer for which you argue here follows not merely from the text of 4(a), but the text of 4(a) plus a continuous -- some variety of a continuous workday rule.
 That's correct.
 You've got to have both.
 That you -- that you have to have a work under the Fair Labor Standards Act, and then you have to have the exclusion from that not apply.
 Yes.
 The issue here, the exclusion doesn't apply, and nobody has raised the question about whether this is hours worked under the Fair Labor Standards Act. But clearly it is, under the Court's decisions.
 But you don't -- but you don't get the answer from simply the text itself.
 That's correct.
 Did you say --
 Mr. Gornstein, what about in the Tum case, the walking and waiting before the donning of the clothes?
 Yes. On the -- on the waiting before the clothes, there's -- there are two series of waits: the first wait and then later waits. As to the later waits, once you decide that the donning begins the process of principal activities --
 I'm talking about the --
 The initial wait.
 -- these. The initial.
 The initial wait --
 You don't think that's covered.
 We do think that's covered. And under -- the Department of Labor's approach is to treat a required wait for an activity as an integral part of that activity. So, if that activity is, itself, compensable as a principal activity, then the required wait for that would also be --
 But the word --
 -- compensable as part of that.
 -- "required" is what I didn't understand in that. My airline example, what's required?
 What the -- the Department distinguishes --
 "Required" is -- sometimes there's a wait, sometimes there's not a wait. Is that required?
 Well, if the employee is simply voluntarily arriving earlier than --
 He has to --
 -- he has to and wait --
 -- put on his uniform. And sometimes there's a wait, sometimes there's --
 When --
 -- not a wait.
 If --
 Is that a required -- or not? And, if it is, where does it say that in the regs?
 It's a required wait anytime, in order to get to the production floor on time, the employee has to be at the donning station in a sufficient period of time to get there, and if there's a wait at that time, then he's being required to wait.
 Mr. Goldstein acknowledged that that issue, the predonning wait, was not decided below.
 I'm not sure I view that the -- the question as not having been decided below. And the Court also did grant certiorari on waiting time.
 But it wasn't, obviously, decided in the first circuit, because they ruled against the employee's position.
 But they said "a reasonable period of time for waiting" is non-compensable. And that, at least as a general rule, is not --
 But the -- but the question of when -- what waiting are we talking about? Before the principal activity or only after? That specific issue, as I understand it, was not aired below.
 Well, I'm -- my memory, at least, of the court of appeals opinion, is that it was saying that the wait before the donning was not compensable, because it was a preliminary activity. But I -- if you've read it differently, then that may be --
 Do we have to decide the second question? I think it's actually quite difficult. I can find a lot of authority that seems to me just --
 The Court always has discretion not to decide --
 No, no, no.
 -- the question.
 I don't mean that.
 It's --
 I mean, is there -- is there a basis in this record -- will it make a difference? It's not really well briefed, I don't think.
 I -- the --
 It's not thoroughly briefed.
 Justice Breyer, if you do not want to decide that question, you don't have to decide it.
 I don't do things on the ground --
 The Court granted --
 -- I'd like it or not.
 -- certiorari as an issue that can be, and should be, resolved, in our view. But if the Court doesn't want to resolve that issue, that's fine.
 Mr. Gornstein, one thing I'm curious about. With all the trouble of various interpretations and famous footnote 49 --
 49.
 -- why, in all these years, hasn't the Department of Labor gotten rid of it? [Laughter.]
 It should have. Because even at the time it was written, that reservation was in tension or not in conflict with the plain language of the regulations. And certainly by the time of Steiner, it was clear that this kind of time was compensable.
 Thank you, Mr. Gornstein. Mr. Phillips, you have four minutes remaining.
 Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice. I just have a couple of points I'd like to make. First, Justice Breyer, I want to start with the waiting times. I didn't actually have an opportunity to spend much time talking about them. But I think the answer that the Solicitor General's Office has offered with respect to the waiting time simply illustrates the expandable nature of the workday. Their position -- Justice Ginsburg -- or, no Justice O'Connor specifically asked that question, "You're not saying that waiting time prior to engaging in a primary activity, in fact, starts the workday." And the answer is, absolutely, it does, because they find that everything that is integral and indispensable triggers the start of the workday. So, to put it into fairly graphic terms. If you have to show up in order to put on a coat in order to go onto the floor in order to do your services, then the waiting time for that coat counts. If, however, you also have to put in earplugs in order to get to the place where you have to get the coat, not only do putting in the earplugs count, under that theory, but, if you have to wait, you have that, and that extends the workday, and all of the walking in between there. So, if you're asking, "Is this going to become a significant liability?" the answer is clearly yes. For very significant compensable acts -- and, indeed, in this context, some of those compensable acts were found by the jury to be utterly diminimus -- you're going to end up with significant waiting time, and you're going to end up with significant walking time.
 Was the predonning waiting issue decided below?
 Yes, Justice O'Connor, they specifically held that all of the waiting time is not -- it is to be excluded. And they did that on the basis of 790.7(g), before you get to the footnote -- because that's the tag to the footnote -- as to what is -- what is the ordinary meaning of wait -- of preliminary and postliminary for waiting time? And the expectation is that if you're waiting to get your check, and if you're waiting to check in, the recognition is that those -- those are completely fortuitous, just as it is here. There's nobody who structured this arrangement so that you will end up spending time waiting. Indeed, the scheme is designed to get people in as efficiently --
 They decided --
 -- as possible.
 -- no waiting time. They didn't decide "if" waiting time -- "which" waiting time. But they said no -- it's irrelevant whether it's before or after, because waiting time isn't covered. So, I don't see how they specifically decided, yes, waiting time is covered, but not --.
 Well, I think, Justice Ginsburg, if they specifically decide that there is no waiting time that's covered here, and the plaintiffs have sought compensation for both pre- and post-waiting time, then the issue is squarely posed, and they've certainly posed it in their petition, and the Court granted it. So, again, obviously, you're free to decline to decide issues, but it seems to me that one is posed. I want to --
 Well, it seems the court below said waiting time isn't covered, so we're not going to engage in any debate about what -- if waiting time is -- - were covered, which waiting time?
 Right, but that just goes to the question -- I think it disposes of the issue of, if you have waiting time that otherwise looks to be fairly ordinary preliminary/postliminary activity, it, nevertheless, can be converted into primary activity under their interpretation of the statute. And they clearly suggest that the answer is yes. Our suggestion is, that's inconsistent with the way waiting time is handled under the regulations; and, therefore, the answer clearly should be no. And, at a minimum, the Court ought to affirm that part of the Tum decision. With respect to the holding of Steiner -- I mean, it's important to put in mind, Steiner -- one of the things -- two things that Steiner focused on -- it focused on section 3.0, and it recognized that there are going to be situations where you're going to be able to bargain away clothes changing. And so, now you're in a situation where, for some -- for -- in some circumstances, because you've bargained away compensation for clothes changing, walking that takes place before or after that will never be compensable; in other situations, it will be compensable. That's an absurd outcome in a situation where Congress clearly had one thing in mind that it absolutely wanted to accomplish, and that was to ensure that walking, riding, traveling to the place where you actually perform the services for which you've been hired, has been -- has -- is excluded from being mandatorily compensated -- Steiner doesn't deal with 4(a)(1); the language is as plain as it can be -- are not -- you know, unless specifically excluded by section 4(a)(1). Thank you, Your Honors.
 Thank you, Mr. Phillips. The case is submitted.
 We'll now hear argument in Whitfield against the United States and Hall against the United States. Ms. Samek.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Congress enacted 18 U.S.C. 1956(h) for the sole purpose of increasing the penalties for money laundering conspiracies. Congress did not intend to abandon the overt act requirement from money laundering conspiracies and for good reason. The list of specified unlawful activities under 1956 is vast. Anytime two or more people conspire or reach an agreement to commit a crime that generates economic proceeds, invariably the discussion will lead to what they're going to do with the money get -- that gets generated, how they're going to spend the money, which is a potential 1957 offense, or how they're going to hide the money, a potential 1956 offense. The Government would charge these agreements as money laundering conspiracies without there even being a single overt act to demonstrate that criminal intent had crystallized, that a money laundering conspiracy was really afoot, and that steps were being taken to launder money, oftentimes triggering substantially higher penalties for the underlying offense, and subverting -- subverting the overt act requirement for conspiracy to commit the underlying offense.
 Would you just clarify one thing for me? Did they have to prove an overt act in order to establish venue?
 Excuse me?
 Does the Government have to prove an overt act in order to establish venue?
 Our position is that the venue provision in 1956(h) for a money laundering conspiracies requires that they establish an overt act and that venue would lie --
 Well, your -- you say the -- the statute requires. I'm just asking if it independently of the conspiracy statute -- of the -- the substantive statute itself, how do they establish venue. Do they have to prove an overt act just for the purpose of getting a venue established --
 Yes.
 -- as they do --
 Is that the only basis for venue? I mean, I thought the statute provides that's just one of the bases for venue.
 Our position is that the venue provision in 1956, 1956(i), is the exclusive venue provision for money laundering.
 But -- but read it. What does it say?
 Are we talking about section 1956(i)?
 Section 1956(i) is the venue provision.
 And doesn't it allow it to be brought where venue would lie if the completed money laundering offense that's the object of the conspiracy has been accomplished or anywhere an overt act was committed? Isn't it an either/or?
 Yes. Our position is that when you read the venue --
 So you don't have to read it as requiring venue. It's just requiring an overt act. If there is an overt act, then venue will lie, but it also will lie where the completed offense would have occurred.
 Certainly, but where the completed offense occurs, there certainly would be overt acts. You know, it's inherent in completing the money laundering transaction that there would be overt acts as part of the financial transaction.
 But why would they state it in the alternative if -- why would they state it in the alternative if the overt act were always required? That's the --
 I agree that it's -- it's somewhat confusing, Your Honor, but we would submit that the Government's interpretation of subclause (2) is that if two people conspired in -- if two people in Florida conspired to commit a money laundering offense in California, absent any overt act whatsoever, conspiracy would lay in California.
 But that doesn't respond to the venue question. Venue, as written in this statute and in most statutes, is permissive. It gives you a choice of forum. It doesn't limit. In -- in the times when venue is exclusive, Congress is explicit in telling you that, but ordinarily a venue provision, as this one, either/or, is permissive. It would be extraordinary to make a venue provision exclusive.
 Well, this Court has made venue provisions exclusive in the patent infringement context and in the Banking Act precisely using the --
 Well, this Court has no authority to make a venue provision either exclusive or permissive. Congress decides that.
 And our position is that Congress made this venue provision the exclusive venue provision --
 I -- I mean, one can understand that if the venue provision just read, a prosecution may be brought in any -- in -- let's see -- may be brought in the district where venue would lie for the completed -- if it just read, venue will lie in any district where an act in furtherance of the attempt or conspiracy took place, then we could argue about whether that is the exclusive venue or not. But I don't see how there is even an argument that it's the exclusive venue when you're dealing with a provision which says that a prosecution may be brought in the district where the -- where venue would lie for the completed offense or in any other district where an act in furtherance took place. How can you possibly read that to say that the exclusive venue is a place where an act in furtherance took place?
 Our position is that those are the two alternatives for where venue would lie for a conspiracy case.
 Oh, okay, but -- but then -- then you acknowledge that the place where an overt act took place is not the exclusive venue.
 Our argument is that the first clause of that provision contemplates the existence of an overt act.
 What about the rule provision for venue, which has not been excluded by the statute? The ordinary provision for venue.
 The ordinary provision for venue would be that venue lies in the district where the crime occurs.
 Yes.
 That would be -- in the money laundering context, under our interpretation of 1956(h), that would be where the overt act occurs. So it would be consistent with it. Our --
 I thought the crime is the conspiracy. The overt act may be an additional requirement.
 The overt act is part of -- it's our position that the overt act is required, and there needs to be an agreement --
 But you will -- you will concede that there are many Federal crimes, conspiracy crimes, in which an overt act is not required. The Shabani case requires you to recognize that.
 Correct. And in those cases where all that's required is an agreement, then venue would lie where the agreement occurs, but in this case, because the -- the offense requires an agreement plus an overt act, it's our position that that's where venue would lie. As a practical matter, if there is -- if -- if this Court construes 1956(h) as requiring overt act, as a practical matter, anytime two people agree to commit a money laundering conspiracy in one district and commit overt acts in another district in furtherance of that, it would be highly unlikely that there would not be some overt act in the district where they agreed to commit the offense.
 So you're saying that it doesn't mean very much because an overt act wouldn't be hard to prove.
 As a --
 But there are -- I mean, the difference between statutes that say overt act is required and those that just say conspiracy -- there are many, many such statutes, and we dealt with one in Shabani. But of all the statutes that include no express overt act requirement, have any of them been read to implicitly include one, which is the argument you're making that we should adopt here?
 That's correct. And no. There -- we have not found any cases where the Court has heretofore read an overt act requirement into a conspiracy provision. But this statute is unique. The money laundering statute is unique. If you look at the statute and we lay it out -- the statute in total -- in our reply brief, starting at 1a -- the structure of 1956 strongly supports our position that all Congress was doing, when they enacted 1956(h), was increasing the penalty for money laundering conspiracies. As this Court is well aware, when Congress typically writes a complex statute, the statute begins by setting forth all of the offense elements. Here, that would be set forth in (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(3). The statute then goes on in subsection (b) to set forth the civil penalty provisions. Subsection (c) then defines the various terms used in the act. Subsection (d) then talks about relationships with other laws. Subsection (e) identifies those Federal agencies that can investigate money laundering offenses. Subsection (f) talks about circumstances under which there would be extraterritorial jurisdiction. Subsection (g) then talks about recording -- reporting requirements, and then you get to subsection (h), which we say, when you read the statute as a whole, clearly intends simply that the penalty for money laundering conspiracies would be increased to the same penalties as those prescribed for the offense provision.
 Except that there are other statutes that -- that read this way, which we have held to -- to create the conspiracy offense, as well as impose the penalty for it.
 Your Honor --
 I mean, it -- it could do that. Any person who conspires to commit any offense defined in this section shall be subject to the same penalties as those prescribed for the offense. And that could be deemed to create the conspiracy offense and prescribe the penalty for it.
 It could be construed as a freestanding offense provision --
 And there are other such provisions, aren't there?
 There are not any other offense -- conspiracy provisions that this Court has interpreted that had the same structural ambiguity as 1956(h).
 Well, Shabani comes pretty close, doesn't it?
 Shabani is a separate, distinct statute. 846 was a separate, distinct, discrete offense statute.
 -- like this it seems to me contains no express requirement of an overt act, and we've said, indeed, none is required and that at common law it wasn't required.
 That's true.
 So why would we read it in here?
 Because text -- as this Court has said on multiple occasions, in order to understand what the words mean in a statute, you have to look at context. So you have to look at where the provision is placed and what Congress meant by that provision and look at the statute as a whole. If anyone -- if we look --
 If you look at this statute as a whole, you don't find the overt act requirement in it anywhere, do you?
 You don't find the overt act explicitly in the statute.
 And the fact that you described it as a long, detailed statute it seems to me cuts against you.
 No, because our position is that placing it in subsection (h) evidences that Congress' intent and sole focus when they enacted this was the purpose of increasing the penalty for money laundering. The --
 Let's get --
 And they were making it unnecessary to rely on the general conspiracy statute in 18-371 or whatever it was.
 It's our position that they're incorporating the overt act requirement, the act in furtherance requirement, from 371 as evidenced by the legislative history.
 If that's so -- if that's so, then why does the venue provision which you were just alluding to earlier read, except as provided in paragraph (2), a prosecution for an offense under this section. An offense under this section or section 1957 may be brought in -- and then it says -- (2) a prosecution for an attempt or a conspiracy offense under this section. Not under section 371, but a prosecution for an attempt or a conspiracy offense under this section.
 And it would be an offense under this section because certainly the jury would need to find that the object of the conspiracy was money laundering. So it would be an offense in that respect.
 I -- I think that language really cuts very hard against you. A conspiracy offense under this section. It -- it is reading as though that's the section that defines the offense, not just the section that provides the penalty.
 I can see how you would read it that way, Your Honor, but the offense --
 Only because I'm a reasonable man. (Laughter.)
 The offense provisions set forth in 1956 are clearly set out and enumerated in subsection (a)(1), (a)(2), and (a)(3). In 1988 -- when the statute was originally enacted, (a)(1) and (a)(2) set forth the offense provisions. When the statute was amended in 1988 and Congress intended to create another offense provision, they set forth (a)(1) -- the third sting provision which is (a)(1)(iii). If Congress intended to create an offense provision when they enacted 1956(h), they would have set it forth as (a)(1)(iv), or alternatively, they would have added or conspires to each of the predecessor offenses. Notably, the offense provision at issue here does not include attempts, which 846 did, and which the overwhelming majority of conspiracy subsections include -- attempts are included with offenses. The fact that Congress did not include attempts in this provision again reflects the fact that they were solely focused on 371, a conspiracy offense, and all they were trying to do was increase the penalty. The placement of the --
 Then you would expect at least a cross reference to 371 for defining the conspiracy, but there's nothing here.
 That's true, and it clearly would -- it certainly would be clearer had they done so. But if you take the language originally, this provision was proposed by Representative Annunzio to be an amendment to 371, and we lay out in our -- in the blue brief at page 12 what that amendment would have looked like, virtually identical language to 1956(h). Certainly if you read it in subsection 371 -- if you take the identical language and put it in section 371, there wouldn't be much of an argument, we would submit, that Congress surely intended to include the overt act, act in furtherance language and they were just talking about increasing the penalty for money laundering. That makes our point that you look at the language, and depending on where it's placed in a statute, it can have different meanings.
 You have given a few examples of a word may mean different things in different contexts, but you haven't given any example -- and I don't know that there is one -- where the entire string of words is identical in two statutes, both dealing with conspiracies, and you read an overt act requirement into one and not the other. I mean, you have a much harder argument to make when you're talking about an entire provision where the wording is almost identical than when you're talking about one word used in different contexts.
 That's true, Your Honor, but as this Court said in Shabani, absent contrary indications, the Court will presume that Congress intends to incorporate the common law concept of the terms that it uses. In Shabani, the defendant did not argue any contrary indications. They argued that at common law conspiracy required the commission of an overt act. That is not our position. But our position is that here there are contrary indications, and because the statute is ambiguous based on the placement and structure of 1956(h), you have to look to see if there are other indications. And clearly in the legislative history --
 Yes, but there's nothing in the text of the statute that's ambiguous, is there?
 No, but that is not dispositive because the placement the Congress has said -- I mean, this Court has said on multiple occasions that you need to read a statute as a whole, and when you look at the --
 But if you read it as a whole, you can't find any ambiguity.
 I think you can find ambiguity, Your Honor.
 In the text of the statute?
 In the --
 Reading the whole text.
 Reading the whole text of the statute, it looks to me it reads that the offenses are set off -- set forth at the beginning, followed by the civil penalties, then procedural aspects, including this penalty provision for increasing conspiracies.
 None of which mentions an overt act.
 No, it doesn't mention an overt act, but --
 So I don't find anything ambiguous in what you describe.
 Well, we believe that 1956(h) clearly reflects Congress' intent to solely increase the penalty.
 Perhaps that's all they thought of, but maybe they did a little more than they thought they were doing.
 Well, if Congress inadvertently omitted the overt act requirement, this Court has on prior occasions read into congressional silence terms, definitions that Congress may have inadvertently left out. So in United States v. Taylor, for example, the question was whether or not Congress intended to revert back to the common law definition of burglary in the Career Criminals Amendment Act, and in 1984, the Career Criminals Amendment Act had language that talked about a generic burglary, breaking and entering into a dwelling. In 1986, when they amended the act, they removed that language. The question before the Court then came up what does -- you know, what does burglary mean. Congress had omitted those words, but the Court found that that wasn't Congress' intent. They clearly didn't intend to revert back to the common law, and it was probably an error of drafting and this Court found that generic burglary was the standard. So this Court has done that before. In the -- in the Perrin case, United States v. Perrin, the same thing. There -- words were missing from the statute and the Court did not find that in Perrin -- it was a bribery case, and what was at issue was whether or not the -- the statute covered bribery of private persons or only the common law definition where it would only incorporate bribery of public -- public persons, public officials. And the Court said even though there are other statutes that have private person language in it, similar to this case, even though there are other statutes that have overt act requirements in it, we are not going to assume that Congress intended to revert back to the common law and interpret bribery as only applying to public officials. So this Court can look at the legislative history. The purpose is clear. The Government admits that the purpose of the act was to increase the penalty. Prior to 1956(h), money laundering conspiracies were prosecuted pursuant to 371, which required the commission of an overt act. Congress clearly intended to increase the penalty from 5 years to a potential 10 or 20 years, based on what the object of the conspiracy was. The legislative history all reflects that fact, and the Government admits that. The -- as contrasted with 846, which -- in which the public law described 846 in a section labeled offenses and provision in the money laundering context, the public law described 1956(h) as a penalty to increase the -- as a money laundering conspiracy for increasing the penalty.
 Can I -- can I ask what you make of subsection (d) of -- of this provision which says that violations of this section may be investigated by such components of the Department of Justice as the Attorney General may direct and by such components of the Department of the Treasury as the Secretary of the Treasury may direct, as appropriate, and with respect to offenses over which the Postal Service has jurisdiction, by the Postal Service? Apparently there was some turf war going on as to who had jurisdiction over these offenses and -- and this was meant to -- to solve the turf war, but it reads violations of this section. Now, does that allocation of authority among Justice and Treasury and the Postal Service not apply to the conspiracy offenses under section 371? Because that's not a violation of this section.
 I'm not sure I understand your point. I would think that if it's a conspiracy to commit -- if the specified unlawful activity is one of the postal offenses or one of the customs offenses, both of which carry --
 The offense is never completed. there's nothing -- nothing occurs except a conspiracy, and you're telling us a conspiracy is not a violation of this section. This section sets forth the penalty -- that's your argument -- but it does not establish the offense. The offense is established by 371. If that's the case, this allocation of responsibility among the various divisions of the Government doesn't apply to conspiracy prosecutions, which would make no sense at all.
 It's our position that when Congress enacted this, they were trying to enact a penalty-enhancing statute. 1956(h) then incorporates or impliedly recognizes the overt act requirement from 371. Congress was not intending to change the way money laundering conspiracies were prosecuted. They would have done so under 371, requiring the act in furtherance, and a jury or a judge would find that money laundering was the object of the conspiracy. That's how Congress envisioned this act as -- as being applied, and so I would assume Congress would envision that if it was a conspiracy to violate one of the postal offenses, that the postal authority would have had authority to investigate that offense. Interesting --
 What do you -- excuse me. What -- what do you make of -- of this argument? Let's start with the premise that Congress wasn't thinking about overt acts at all. Start with the premise that you argue from that what Congress was concerned with here was primarily penalty. However, Congress did this in a context in which there are two recognized kinds of statutes, two recognized kinds of -- of conspiracy formulations. And if one has the magic words in it referring to an overt act, you got to prove an overt act. In the other variety, there's no reference to overt acts, and as a general rule, you don't have to prove overt acts. Why isn't it a sensible interpretive rule to say, look, when there are recognized models and Congress, in fact, chooses one rather than another, we're not going to get into the question of did Congress really mean to make a change when it picked one model rather than the other? It simply picked one model, and the -- the clearest way to have a coherent system of conspiracy law is to apply the model. If it didn't talk about overt act, there's no overt act requirement. Why isn't that a sensible way to -- to work our way through these thickets?
 I -- I think that would be a sensible way to work your way through thickets of statutes that were enacted after Shabani when this Court created that formulary.
 But Shabani rested on -- on the existence of these prior models. Shabani didn't create them.
 That's correct, but there is nothing in the legislative history to suggest that Nash and Singer, the cases that Shabani relied on, were ever discussed or contemplated by Congress. If Congress was going to make such a fundamental change in how they were going to prosecute money laundering conspiracies, they would have said so. We're not talking about a backdrop of not requiring an overt act and should Congress read an overt act into Congress' silence.
 There are about -- there are over 50, I think, in title 18 alone conspiracy provisions with no overt act requirement, no explicit overt act requirement. The -- the argument you're making, I suppose, would require this Court to go by -- one by one through those 50-odd statutes, and there would be contests of every one because the absence of those words is not dispositive, as you see it. So you would be generating a controversy about 50-odd statutes that would be gone, that just wouldn't be there if you agreed with Justice Souter's approach.
 Well, we don't -- we don't believe that's the case because if you look at all of those subsections in title 18, none of them have the structural ambiguity that 1956(h) has, combined with a venue provision --
 Have you looked at all 59, I think --
 The --
 -- and assured yourself on that?
 I've -- I've looked through the entire statute, and I have not found -- title 18. I have not found any that have both an anomaly, a structural anomaly, and a venue provision that turns on the existence of an overt act.
 Well, we've already dealt with venue where I think your argument is exceedingly weak since the statute phrases it as a permissive not a requirement.
 Well, first of all, we would submit, just briefly on -- on the venue point, if Congress wanted this to be a permissive venue provision, they could have said venue would lie where and in the circumstances or as otherwise required by statute, in which case they could have shown that they were applying to other statutory bases for venue, as well as what Congress was establishing here. They didn't do that. The venue provision was enacted in response to this Court's decision in Cabrales, which dealt with the money laundering -- the substantive offense of money laundering, and this Court's suggestion that money laundering could be considered a continuing violation for purposes of 18 U.S.C. 3237, the continuing offense venue provision. If all Congress was doing was codifying that principle and trying to address the issue in Cabrales, they would have just dealt with substantive money laundering in the venue provision. They would not have also included a provision in the venue section dealing with conspiracy. The fact that they did and the fact that they used language that this Court has previously found to --
 It gave -- it gave the prosecutor more choices of where to bring suit.
 We say those are the only choices on where to bring suit. But --
 Do you want to reserve any time?
 Oh, yes. I'm sorry.
 Mr. Marcus.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The money laundering conspiracy statute does not require proof of an overt act for three reasons. First, the text of the statute contains no such requirement. Second, the statute is modeled on the drug conspiracy statute which this Court unanimously held in the Shabani case does not require proof of an overt act. Third, the statute was enacted against the background rule of statutory construction that -- that a conspiracy provision, whose text conditions liability on the act of conspiring only, will be construed to follow the common law, where proof of an overt act was not required for conviction. This Court should adhere to its bright line rule in this case because it provides clear guidance to Congress and to the lower courts. Petitioners seek to avoid application of the bright line rule on a variety of grounds, none of which has -- none of which has merit. I will address a few of those grounds here. First, the money laundering conspiracy statute, section 1956(h), is not a penalty provision for the general conspiracy statute, section 371. Section 1956(h) does not contain any reference to section 371, and petitioners are unable to cite any provision in the United States Code that provides a penalty for an offense defined elsewhere, without also referencing where that offense is defined. Under petitioners' theory, if section 371 were repealed tomorrow, section 1956(h) would also no longer be valid. But there is --
 If -- if 371 were repealed, would it affect the actual practice in the Justice Department? I -- I think I recall reading in the briefs for the other side that -- that the -- the United States has continued to charge conspiracies in money laundering cases under 371. Is that correct?
 Well, my understanding is on -- on occasion that is done in a multi-object conspiracy case. Where there are several objects to the conspiracy sometimes for purpose of simplification, the Government will just -- will charge a 371 --
 But not in exclusively laundering cases.
 Generally, no. There might be -- there might be an occasional example where it may have been an oversight where a prosecutor may have overlooked section 1956(h), maybe soon after 1956(h) was enacted, but generally speaking no. The money laundering conspiracy prosecutions were done under 1956(h).
 When -- when you say when there are multiple objects, you're not getting the money -- money laundering just under 371. You'd surely charge both under 371 and under -- under -- what is it? 1956.
 That's correct, Justice Scalia. You could. You could prosecute -- you could prosecute them as -- as separate offenses, but sometimes the Government for -- just for purpose of simplification will just charge one -- one agreement with multiple objects, and one of those objects might be a money laundering object.
 If it were just money laundering, could you charge under 371?
 Yes, you could charge under 371. There's nothing that prevents the Government from doing so. This Court has -- has held before, for example, in the Batchelder case that there can be multiple provisions that essentially cover the same conduct, and the Government has discretion to choose which one to use. Generally speaking, the money laundering conspiracy statute contains higher penalties. So the practice today is -- is to prosecute those offenses under section 1956(h). Another -- another reading there -- another reason they're reading that it's a penalty provision should be rejected is that Congress modeled section 1956(h) on the drug conspiracy statute that's virtually identically worded to section 1956(h), and no one disputes that the drug conspiracy statute establishes a freestanding criminal offense.
 This is 846.
 846, yes, in title 21. Petitioners also argue that because prior to enactment of section 1956(h), the Government had to prosecute money laundering conspiracies for 6 years under section 371, that this Court should presume that Congress intended to perpetuate the overt act requirement of section 371 into the money laundering conspiracy offense. But this Court looks, first, to the text of the statute to discern Congress' intent, and had Congress wanted to perpetuate section 371's overt act requirement, it could have easily modeled the text of section 1956(h) on the language from 371 or on the language from any of the other numerous conspiracy provisions in the code that contained express overt act requirements. Congress chose a different model, the drug conspiracy statute, which as I said before, this Court held in Shabani does not contain an overt act requirement. By choosing that model, Congress manifested its intent not to require proof of an overt act because at the time it -- because at the time it acted, the background rule of statutory construction provided that a conspiracy statute that conditions liability solely on the act of conspiring would be construed to follow the common law. Petitioners point to silence in the legislative history, but the silence in the legislative history on the overt act requirement is not the kind of compelling evidence of -- of contrary intent that would justify departing from the text of the statute and this Court's bright line rule. Finally, petitioners rely on a venue provision for money laundering cases, section 1956(i), which was enacted 9 years after the money laundering conspiracy statute at issue here. That venue provision reflects Congress' intent to identify a variety of districts in which money laundering cases can be brought. It does not reflect an intent to redefine the -- the elements of the substantive money laundering conspiracy offense.
 What do you make of the -- the argument that I think occurs in the yellow brief, that -- the reference to any other district where an act in furtherance, et cetera, took place implies that in the clause preceding, they were referring to a district in which an act in furtherance took place?
 Justice Souter, I think what -- what that terminology was -- was referring to was district. The other is meant to modify district. In other words, the first -- the first clause there provides a venue where the case can be brought. And if it's not brought in that -- if it doesn't fall within that venue, then you can bring it in -- in a different district, an other district. I think that's the -- the best way to read the -- the statute. I mean, otherwise, it could have -- as it was pointed out during petitioners' argument, otherwise they could have just had one. They wouldn't need separate clauses. They could have just had one clause that said, and the case -- the conspiracy case can be brought in any district where an overt act was committed. Petitioners seize on the fact that the venue provision permits venue to be laid in any district in which an overt act was committed. But the rule in conspiracy cases has always been that an overt -- that venue can be laid where an overt act was committed regardless of whether an overt act was an element of the offense. At common law, as I said before, conspiracies -- a conspiracy conviction did not rely -- depend on proof of an overt act, and yet venue could always be laid at common law where an overt act was committed. The common law venue rule has been applied consistently to modern Federal conspiracy statutes, such as the drug conspiracy statute, which likewise does not require proof of an overt act as an element of the offense. Congress' codification in the money laundering statute of -- of this -- of this venue principle cannot be read to presuppose an overt act element when the very venue rule it was codifying did not presuppose one. If this Court -- if this Court has no further questions --
 I had just one other question, just out of curiosity, about how important this case is. How many prosecutions under this statute does the Government bring without proving an overt act?
 I'm -- I'm not aware of -- I'm not aware of a number, Justice Stevens.
 Are there any?
 I -- I don't know. I mean, it's --
 It seems to me quite unlikely.
 Well --
 I'm just wondering. It seems to me sort of a tempest in a teapot, this whole case to me.
 Yes. I think it's true in the vast majority of cases, the Government does have proof of an overt act. And, of course, overt acts help establish the -- establish the agreement and -- and to convince the jury beyond a reasonable doubt there was an agreement. If the Court has no further questions --
 I -- I do have one and it's not on the money laundering conspiracy issue, but in this particular case, would it be consistent with the position that the Solicitor General has been taking for us to hold the final disposition of this case pending Booker and Fanfan? Wasn't there a sentencing question?
 Well, it's our position that it wasn't -- they didn't raise that issue in -- in the court of appeals. They didn't raise the Sixth Amendment issue in the court of appeals. They didn't raise that issue in their cert petition here, and so it's -- it's not covered by the -- by the question presented. So it is the position that we've -- that we've set out in the brief that it should not be -- it should not be held pending that -- that disposition in Booker and Fanfan.
 And that's consistent with the position that the Government has been taking routinely in cases where Booker -- where the sentencing guidelines are an issue?
 Well, I think in the -- I think that that position is based on petitions that have raised the question, I believe. If -- if the Court has no further questions, it should reaffirm the conspiracy statutes that do not contain an overt act requirement should not be read to include one. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Marcus. Ms. Samek, you have about 3 and a half minutes left.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Justice Ginsburg, you had inquired about the number of subsection -- conspiracy subsections, and I didn't get a chance to answer your question. Even if you don't find the statute is unique because of the venue provision, as my review of the conspiracy subsections in title 18, there were only about two others out of the 50-some-odd cases that have the same structural anomaly that 1956(h) does. So this would not be opening up a can of worms to say that in this case an overt act clearly was intended by Congress and that we need to look at congressional intent. So it wouldn't be -- require -- a holding in this case consistent with congressional purpose would not require the Court to then have to review every single title 18 conspiracy subsection. As the Government pointed out, money laundering cases are not typically prosecuted without the commission of an overt act because overt acts are relatively simple to prove. There's no reason why Congress would have intentionally eliminated the overt act requirement from money laundering conspiracies when, on the one hand, it's easy to prove, but on the other hand, it placed such a critical value in money laundering conspiracies because it's not just that it shows that criminal intent has crystallized and that money laundering is actually afoot, but you're talking about taking offenses, like we say in our brief, where someone pledges a -- a cow for collateral for a loan and then they talk with a friend about whether or not they should sell the cow, and they decide not to sell the cow. Under the Government's theory, they couldn't be prosecuted for defrauding the Government because, in fact, they never sold the cow. They couldn't be prosecuted for conspiracy to defraud the Government because they didn't commit an overt act in furtherance of defrauding the Government. They couldn't be convicted or prosecuted for money laundering because they never sold the cow, so there were never any proceeds to generate. But they could be convicted, under the Government's theory, of conspiracy to commit money laundering based on the sale of a cow and their sentence would increase from a potential 5 years to a potential 20 years. There's absolutely no indication in the Congressional Record that Congress ever intended such dramatic triggering of substantially higher penalties without the commission of an overt act, which is not difficult to prove.
 The Government has said that -- that you have essentially waived their sentencing guidelines issue that you asked us in footnote 6 of your brief to consider.
 In the district court, there were issues raised as to all defendants as far as various sentencing enhancements. In front of the Eleventh Circuit, one of those enhancements was argued and it was rejected. As to Mr. Hall, one of the sentencing enhancements were argued and was reversed on that sentencing enhancement. But there is still a sentencing enhancement that was raised in the Eleventh Circuit, but it was not raised in this petition. It was not the issue that this Court granted cert on, but we would argue that it's still a valid -- a valid claim and that this Court should hold this decision in abeyance until its decision in Booker and Fanfan.
 Was the argument below that -- -- that imposing the sentencing enhancement was unconstitutional, or was the argument just that the facts didn't support it?
 The argument was that the facts didn't support it. Finally, Your Honor, we would -- Your Honors, we would just again say that Congress did not intend to cause a dramatic change in the way money laundering conspiracies were prosecuted. This Court has said in other cases that when Congress intends dramatic changes, that you would expect to find something in the legislative history. The Court has said that in the Lewis case having to do with interstate gambling and -- I see my time is up. Thank you.
 Thank you very much. The case is submitted.
 We'll now hear argument in Spector against the Norwegian Cruise Line. Mr. Goldstein.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The petitioners in this case are American citizens who took cruises to and from this country on tickets bought here that call for the application of U.S. law. They were subject to discrimination by respondent, a U.S.-based company on the land, in the ports, and in the waters of the United States. The question presented is whether the Americans With Disabilities Act applies or instead whether respondent's conduct is lawful because the case is controlled by Bahamian law, which freely permits cruise lines to discriminate against persons with disabilities.
 Mr. Goldstein, may I inquire of you whether other countries, for instance, in the EU area, have applied their own disability laws to some of the cruise ships that touch base in their courts?
 Justice O'Connor, our research does not reveal that the question has arisen in the EU. I can, however, provide you some information, and that is that -- two points I think. The first is they subscribe -- the members of the EU subscribe to the same conventions and to UNCLOS just the way we do, which gives the port state plenary authority within its ports and internal waters. And I have a couple of case citations for you on this issue. In the ECJ, the Diva Navigation case, 1992, ECR I-6019, and the Mateo Peralta case, 1994, ECR I-3453. It has not arisen in the EU, but it has arisen in Australia. Australia has a disability law. It applies that law to cruise ships, and the rule in Australia is that the port state law applies rather than the flag state law. And the citation for that is the Union Shipping case, 2002, NSWCA 124 CA 40379/01. I don't know what those numbers mean.
 Thank you. And would you also address at some point how the treaty on Safety of Life at Sea would affect the resolution here? For example, it has, as I understand it, requirements that there be watertight doors and those doors have to be set above the level of the floor so you couldn't roll a handicapped wheelchair or something over it. Now, do you anticipate that there would have to be structural changes if you were to prevail that would conflict with the treaty on Safety of Life at Sea?
 No, and you have put your finger on the point, and that is that there are no conflicts. We know that for a couple of reasons. The first is that there has been a detailed rulemaking underway in which the regulatory authorities charged by Congress with implementing the ADA have spent quite some time. They have produced this single-spaced, half-inch thick document that is dedicated to making --
 Are they in effect yet?
 They are not, but in terms of whether or not the statute, when it's applied, would conflict, you would look to this document and they took as their regulatory mission to make sure there were no such conflicts. What they did -- let me take your example specifically and then put -- place it within the statutory framework. Within the ADA and a question of the combings, what they said is, that's right. In certain cases SOLAS requires that the coamings be a certain height. If the coamings are below the bulkhead level, where you would be worried about water coming in below, that is not an accessible route, and so you don't have to worry about it at all. Above there, you ramp up to the coaming and ramp down, unless that's structurally infeasible. So they -- what they did is they -- and this is the broader point. they applied the rule of the ADA that a change to the structure of the vessel only has to be implemented if it's readily achievable. And what the regulatory authorities determined is that if there is any conflict with SOLAS at all, that change need not be made. Now, you -- Justice O'Connor, you also focused on the fact that there are some of our claims that implicate the structure of the ship. They are, however, a distinct minority, and we ought not lose sight of this because I don't think the other side has any good argument at all, under international law or anything else, that would explain why they can charge a person with a disability double.
 Can you tell me just a little bit about that, how it works? Suppose that you prevail in this case -- and it does seem to me that the -- the charging the double doesn't involve modification of the ship, obviously. How does it work if you have, oh, say, an English passenger who buys an English ticket and is charged double -- I don't know if that's the English law, but let's assume -- then he comes on a cruise ship and he goes to New York and Miami and -- and New Orleans? Can he -- does he -- could he then sue, if -- if we rule for you in this case?
 I would think on the question of the charging double, the answer to that question would be no because it would present a traditional, not unique to the ADA, choice-of-law question, and that is, if you're in England and you buy a ticket in England, your ticket is going to be subject to English common -- in that case, the English disability law. There is an English disability law. It doesn't discuss cruise ships. It's -- but it's broadly written. But with respect to the structure of the ship, I think that English passenger with a disability -- say that you come across to the United States and you want to get off in New York. I think that Congress clearly intended that that person would be able to come off a -- off the dock in a wheelchair, back onto the dock on the wheelchair; while you were in U.S. ports and you're staying in your cabin, that you would be able to, in your accessible -- your accessible rest room, have grab bars. We are -- and -- and let me not pass too quickly by the fact that even when we talk about some structural changes in the ship, by and large we're talking about things that have nothing to do with -- Justice O'Connor, you focused the name of the treaty is the Safety of Life at Sea. Whether the bathroom doors swing in and out has nothing to do with that. Whether there is --
 Mr. Goldstein, may -- may I take it from your answer that it doesn't make any difference in your view, your answer to the question about the -- the ship leaving from a port in England and going many places and touching base in New York, that kind of a voyage, or what this case seems to be where the vast majority of the passengers are from the United States, the port of departure is in the United States, the port of return is in the United States. You don't seem to distinguish those cases because you say in the New York port, it doesn't matter if it's really a U.S.-centered cruise or a cruise centered in Italy or any place else. Is that correct?
 I think your formulation is exactly right, Justice Ginsburg. It doesn't matter to us where the cruise is centered. We do, however, and this Court's precedents do, however, leave room for a highly unusual cruise that I'm not aware exists. Take, for example, a situation in which a cruise comes from England to the United States. It doesn't pick up any passengers here. They just visit. They stop in 15 other countries. They stop here. The same passengers get up on the ship and leave. This Court's precedents involving maritime choice of law leave room for the conclusion that says, look, we just don't think --
 But if we go back to what is the more usual situation --
 Yes.
 Then you are, in effect, saying that the U.S. rules the world. Even if the home port, the place where this vessel is usually berthed, says we -- we don't require our ships to take care of the handicapped, you are, in effect, saying no matter what the other ports say, what the U.S. law is is going to govern because practically if you're going to design the ship to meet the U.S. requirements, you're not going to rip those out when the ship goes elsewhere.
 Justice Ginsburg, we disagree with the characterization that the U.S. rules the world, of course. We're talking about the fact that Congress exercised its sovereign authority to control vessels in its ports and internal waters, just as in -- take the Cunard example. In the Cunard case, there were countries -- and I understand it didn't involve the structure of the ship, but the principle is the same. There were countries that required alcoholic beverages to be on those vessels, and --
 We -- we could -- we could require ships that are docked in the United States to pay their crews according to United States Jones Act requirements or United States minimum wage laws and so forth. We don't do that. We could do it, but we don't because it conflicts with -- with the law of the flag and -- and that's the usual -- it's not a matter of our power to do it. We could do it, of course, but it's just not something we ordinarily do.
 Well, Justice Scalia, I actually disagree with your characterization and would like to point you to a couple of precedents. The Benz and McCulloch cases, which are very important to the respondents, were very important to the Fifth Circuit, embody the principle that you just described, to some extent, and that is that when you have a foreign ship in our waters, we will not apply the NLRA to the labor contract between the foreign crew and the foreign vessel. But when Americans are involved, we do apply the NLRA, and that's the Ariadne precedent that the -- and -- and in fact, Ariadne is the most on-point case because it --
 Was -- was that the ship or was it longshoremen?
 It was longshoremen working on the ship complaining about safety conditions on the ship.
 Longshoremen. Longshoremen based -- based on shore. Right?
 Based on shore, but so are the passengers.
 That's a different --
 But it is a different situation, but I think it's more analogous. Not only were the -- the protests in Ariadne directed at the safety conditions on the foreign-flagged vessel, but they were directed at the passengers. If I could --
 What's -- what's the scope of what you're talking about here? I mean, are -- it says cruise ships. So I had assumed those are those big ships that carry people mostly around the Mediterranean from Florida. But based on what you're saying, now I think you're talking about something more. Are you talking, for example, about a merchant vessel that comes from, say, Saudi Arabia and has a few passengers? What's the -- what's the scope of the definition?
 The -- well, that -- the definition -- we would have to return to the ADA. If a merchant ship has a few passengers, it would not be a specified form of public transportation or a public accommodation.
 Because? It -- what it does is it carries oil, but a certain number of people like to be on a ship with oil, I guess. And so every -- every month they take 12 people and they put them in a cabin somewhere and they love it.
 It's cheaper. It's cheaper too. (Laughter.)
 I'm not aware of -- of --
 No, no. I -- but all right. Now, I'm -- I'm being facetious.
 Yes.
 But I am aware of -- of people who have certainly gone on cruises on what is a primarily merchant ship. Now that -- that I think is a common thing.
 If -- let me --
 Are you talking -- because I think that makes a difference for the reason that once you talk about those, you're talking about primarily foreign-flagged vessels that are rarely but sometimes in the United States where the costs would be very high probably to change the ship and the benefit to Americans would be tiny. All right. So I -- I want to know what you're talking about.
 Okay. Let me first say -- and just to -- to lock the point down in that cost is accounted for in the definition of what is readily achievable. But let's go to the definition of specified public transportation because this will tell us what's going to be covered by the ADA. And just for the transcript, the citation is -- this is section 12181(110). It's -- it's very short, but it's at the middle of page 12 of the blue brief. Specified public transportation means transportation by bus, rail, or any other conveyance other than by aircraft, which has its own statute, that provides the general public with general or special service on a regular and continuing basis. That too would be covered. And only the public places on the ship would be covered by it. Can I just return briefly to my Ariadne point? Because I just wanted -- that's a case where the -- the NLRA was applied. And let me just read to you what the protest was that the NLRA was applied to because it fits perfectly with this case. And again, for the transcript, this is in the lower court opinion at 215 So.2d 53. This was the handbill. Warning. Is your cruise ship a floating death trap? Can a substandard foreign-flagged cruise ship turn your holiday into a Holocaust? They were very illiterate. If thousands of unsuspecting Americans continue to place their lives in jeopardy every day on cruises aboard foreign-flagged floating fire traps. And that -- that was a foreign-flagged ship. They we're concerned about the passengers. Justice Scalia, you also gave the example of the Jones Act, but remember that the Rhoditis case and the Uravic case, which involved injuries in the United States, then the Jones Act did apply. And that was -- and Rhoditis was a case in which someone was on the ship and a chain broke and they were injured as a result of it, and U.S. law applied. This is a situation in which millions of people in the United States are spending billions of dollars on cruises, and it seems --
 Yes, but I -- if I understand you correctly, your case really isn't limited to cruise ships. It's limited to ships that come into -- passenger ships, which would include the Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, all the rest of them. Wouldn't it?
 Yes, but I -- I take it that the -- you know --
 And the fact that it's based in Miami or it had mostly American customers really is not relevant to the legal issue. Is it?
 It -- it is in the sense that it makes this the recurring scenario that Congress would have been aware of when it enacted the ADA in --
 But, of course, they would have been aware of those that are also less American in their patronage and so forth.
 That's true. In the very rare case, which I am not aware of, in which a cruise ship comes to the United States, doesn't pick up passengers, then it's possible that the -- that the ADA would not apply.
 No, but we're not necessarily thinking of a cruise ship, just the transatlantic liner that goes from Liverpool to Miami or something. That would be covered.
 It would in -- in U.S. territory. That's right.
 But there's no way they can change the ship structurally when it's in New York and not have it changed structurally when it's in Europe. So the mystery to me at this moment is what is the universe of ships that I would not say fit the ordinary word cruise. What they are are ships that go between Asia and San Francisco, Los Angeles, or New York and Europe, or maybe through the Suez Canal. They're only here a little bit of the time. Their passengers are mostly not American. Now, is that something I should worry about? If that were your case, I would be very worried. If that's just a little bit of -- of added significance, then I want to know what to do about it.
 Let me tell you what I know, and that is that the other side has not identified any problems of this -- this type. My research has not revealed some situation where we have a lot of these ships. I did carefully study the -- the itineraries of the major cruise lines, and 95 percent-plus of all of their trips go out from the United States and come back to the United States.
 But you told me -- and I want to make sure this is your answer -- that it doesn't matter, that as long as the ship comes to a U.S. port as part of this overall journey, you -- you answered that question and I thought that was your candid answer, that it doesn't matter that these -- these particular cruise ships ply mostly U.S. waters and U.S. trade and are centered, even have their principal place of business in the United States. You're not concentrating on that category. You are saying that the ADA applies so long as the ship puts in at -- at a U.S. port, picks up passengers. It applies not only while it's in the port, but practically for every other place the ship goes. That's why I asked isn't this the United States rules the world on what -- your argument you made.
 Justice Ginsburg, here I think is the difference, and that is, that while U.S. law may have an extraterritorial consequence, just like our maritime tort law and the like, you cannot in Europe enforce the ADA. The fact that the structural changes --
 Well, you can enforce the -- the discrimination provisions, but the structural provisions don't have to be enforced. Once the step is changed, they're not going to change it when they get 3 miles out.
 That's right. But Justice -- Justice Ginsburg's point -- I take it to be a more particular one. It's true that our law will have consequences abroad, but it is not the case that the U.S. rules the world.
 Well, it rules the world unless the world does not want to use the United States ports as ports of call.
 Justice -- Justice Souter, I -- I simply disagree, and that is, when you talk about the U.S. ruling the world, in a -- in the context, say, of ARAMCO, we talked about the enforceability of U.S. law abroad. When the United States has tort standards or vehicle manufacturing standards and the like, all of those have consequences abroad for how devices are made and brought into the country. But that doesn't mean that -- what's going on is the plenary authority of the United States to enforce its laws in its ports and in its internal waters. That very rule always will have extraterritorial consequences.
 We're not questioning the authority. We're questioning whether Congress intended that to be the case. We have a rule that -- that requires a clear statement when it has effects of this sort.
 Justice Scalia, we disagree, and let me just take you to your cases. I did that, I think, in the Jones Act and the NLRA context. But let's just state the rule, and that is, from the Wildenhus's Case and that's at page 12. Foreign law governs matters of discipline and all things done on board which affected only the vessel and those belonging to her and did not involve the peace or dignity of the country or the tranquility of the port. And what we're talking --
 But, Mr. Goldstein, there's another aspect that troubles me. Your view, as I understand, only applies while the ship is in American waters so that if, for example, you complain about the training for a safety drill, if they conducted those after they'd gone out 20 miles to sea, there would be -- there would be no violation of the -- the statue. Would there?
 That is -- that is a difficult question. We have not -- we have not pleaded such a claim.
 In other words, I'm trying to understand. You don't know what your position is --
 No.
 -- with respect to what would otherwise be violations of the statute that occur on the high seas.
 We do believe it would be covered because the accommodation was purchased here, although we haven't raised the claim in this Court. If I could reserve the remainder --
 Yes, but I think we should -- the cruise ships are entitled to know whether they may freely discriminate against people in the casinos and so forth when they're on the high seas.
 We --
 You don't know the answer to that.
 Justice Stevens, our position is that because of the definition of commerce in the ADA, when you purchase a public accommodation in the United States, that is an agreement to provide a public accommodation and it doesn't --
 So your view is not limited to what happens in the territorial waters.
 That is right, although we have -- we would win the case on the internal waters and the territorial waters, and we haven't asserted in this Court a claim relating to the high seas. If I could reserve the remainder of my time.
 Mr. Salmons, may I ask before you begin whether the United States agrees that the statute would apply to the activities of these ships when they're on the high seas?
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: We do not think that title III of the ADA was intended to apply extraterritorially. That said, we think there is a question that would need to be resolved as to whether applying the ADA to a public accommodation that was entered into in the United States, that began in the United States, a necessary term of which we believe would be nondiscrimination, would in fact be an extraterritorial application of U.S. law.
 When -- when the ship is out on the high seas?
 That's correct, Justice Scalia.
 You think that's a hard question --
 No. We think the better view --
 -- whether that's an extraterritorial application of U.S. law?
 No. We think the better view, in fact, Justice Scalia, is that that would not be an extraterritorial application of U.S. law. But if the Court were to disagree, then we would say title III does not apply at that time.
 Do you --
 I don't know what extraterritorial application means if it doesn't mean that, that a ship that is not in the United States is bound by United States law. What -- why isn't that extraterritorial application?
 The reason, Justice Scalia, would be because the accommodation that was offered, that was entered into, and that began in the United States -- and -- and I would point out -- I think this is important to keep in mind --
 What you're saying is it would -- I thought you were saying that it would be the enforcement of the domestic contract of which the -- the statutory provisions would be an implied term. Isn't that it?
 Yes. Yes, that's correct.
 It does not apply of its own force. It applies because two parties in the United States contracted that it would apply. Is that it?
 That's correct. Now -- now, I -- I would just add that I think it -- you could characterize a public accommodation, you know, five nights lodging, for example. If that's entered into in the United States and -- and that begins in the United States, that a necessary term of that is nondiscrimination, and --
 Well, then if you --
 -- if you have an ADA claim that governs that even if the discrimination occurred abroad, that would only relate to those things tied into the accommodation.
 But if you're on a round trip ticket from Liverpool to Miami and back, it would depend on where you bought the ticket.
 Well, again, we -- we think that if accommodation begins here in the United States, that -- that a necessary term of that is nondiscrimination. Now, whether you characterize that as a contract claim or as a substantive application of the ADA, I'm not sure there's much of a difference.
 Yes, but Justice Stevens' question is you buy the ticket in Liverpool. Is the ADA -- an -- an American buys the ticket in Liverpool to come to the United States.
 To come to the United States.
 Is the ADA an applied term of that contract?
 I would -- I would assume not, although the question then would be whether or not it's a public accommodation that's been offered in the United States.
 Don't -- don't all --
 Even in U.S. waters? That wouldn't make sense. An American buys a ticket in -- in Liverpool. He's disabled. He goes to New York, Miami, New Orleans, and he's discriminated at -- at each step. No -- no coverage just because of where he bought the ticket?
 No, no, Justice Kennedy, that's not our position. Let me -- let me try and be clear. We think that any vessel that comes into the internal waters and ports of the United States and offers a public accommodation or a specified public transportation service to our residents is subject to the ADA.
 Do you --
 Well, that means --
 If -- if you had a situation -- I'm sorry.
 No, go ahead.
 If you had a situation where you had a ship that -- let's say, that began in -- in Great Britain and came here, it didn't pick up passengers here in the United States, I think that the better view would be, sure, United States law could apply to it because it's in our internal waters, but that as a substantive matter, with regard to the ADA, I don't know why that would be a public accommodation within the meaning of the ADA because it's not an accommodation that's offered --
 But do you --
 -- or available to United States residents.
 Do you agree with Mr. Goldstein that nothing turns on -- one might characterize this kind of cruise as U.S.-centered, but his answer was as long as they put in, a regular cruise stop, they pick up, they unload passengers, they take them back again on the ship, so long as they touch base at a U.S. port, letting off and picking up passengers, the ADA applies? Do you agree with that interpretation?
 As I understand what Your Honor just said, I think that I would. Let me just clarify, though. We think the relevant question is whether that ship would -- has offered a public accommodation or a specified public transportation service --
 This is my --
 -- in the United States, and if the answer is yes --
 Let -- let me ask you the same question that I asked Mr. Goldstein. Even in the Cunard case, the prohibition case, they couldn't have liquor in the U.S. port, but when they leave and they go to Jamaica, they could pick up rum there. They could have liquor all the rest of the time so long as, when they enter and leave the U.S. port, they didn't have the liquor aboard. Here what you're saying is what goes in the -- for the New York port goes for every other place where this ship puts in.
 Well, again, I -- not as a matter of -- not as a matter of extraterritorial application of U.S. law, but that is our position with regard to a public accommodation that begins in the United States. I -- I think the -- the important --
 Suppose it doesn't begin in the United States in that it -- it starts in, say, The Bahamas, and stops at --
 I should probably should not have said begin, Your Honor. What I mean is if it -- if the public accommodation is provided for in the United States, that would be covered by the terms of the ADA, we think the ADA applies.
 Then you're saying exactly what everybody is worried about. I take it there is no way really for a ship to -- they either have the right door or they don't have the right door. And we're interested in the set of cases in which they're going to have to change their doors. And what I came in here thinking was we're talking about ships that pick up people and sail in Florida and sail around the Caribbean. That's the -- now, I've heard nothing but we're not talking just about those. We are talking about ships like I'm the last human being alive that went on a Swiss ship to Europe. Okay? (Laughter.)
 50 years ago. And -- and we're talking about those ships, or we're talking about merchant ships that also say to the public, come as a passenger. Now, I would like to -- not what you're arguing. You're going to say, yes, we are arguing it. I want to know -- say something to relieve my concern about that set, which was Justice Ginsburg's concern. We are trying to rule the world in respect to those ships that only come here occasionally or it isn't a big part of their business, but they want to come to pick up American passengers.
 Sure. Sure. And what I would say with regard to that is that you're right that our broad view is that the ADA applies if that -- if they're offering public accommodation here in the United States. But if you reject that, I think there are several ways you could approach that. One would be to apply traditional choice-of-law factors that are -- that are applicable in maritime, and you could conclude, you know, based on sort of whether or not there are sufficient contacts here and whether or not --
 Well, you're saying that this is your position, but don't worry about it because we'll reject your position?
 No, no. He asked me to say something that -- that would -- would help his concerns. What I'm trying to say --
 One thing might be true, what you're not saying, is there really aren't very many of those ships, or another thing you might say, which you're not saying because maybe isn't true, is almost all of those ships that there are are already subject to tougher -- tougher rules, say, in Europe. But you don't say either of those.
 No. No --
 Since you don't you say either of those, I think neither may be true.
 Well, I don't know the specific number. I would think that there are not many that the -- that this -- what you're concerned with primarily here are cruise ships that are in the business of providing public accommodations. But I would add as well -- and I think this is very important that the Court keep in mind -- that the clear statement rule, as it's -- as it's posited by respondent here, would not just apply to the ADA. It would apply to all U.S. laws, and that would include title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 in its prohibition of racial discrimination, and I would find that that would be a remarkable construction.
 It depends on what -- what kind of laws you're talking about. Laws that require the crew to be treated differently are -- are quite different from law -- laws that -- that require a passenger to be treated a certain way in the United States.
 Justice Scalia, you're correct, and that's precisely why they have --
 And laws -- laws that require structural alteration of a ship are quite different from laws that say while you're in United States waters, you won't discriminate on the basis of race.
 If -- two -- two responses, if I may, Your Honor. And that is, if you -- if that is the conclusion you reach, then you still need to remand this case because there are an awful number of claims that are precisely those kinds of claims that the Fifth Circuit would not allow. Secondly, I think you're wrong with regard to the scope of the clear statement requirement. There is no requirement that you have to have a clear statement to apply a U.S. law to a foreign vessel. There is only a requirement that you need a clear statement if the conduct at issue would relate only to the internal matters of that vessel. And here you're dealing with public accommodation --
 If we haven't expressed it yet, we ought to express it then.
 Well, I disagree, Your Honor. And what I would point you to is -- is that the long -- every time this Court has spoken with regard to the clear statement requirement relating to foreign-flagged ships, it has referred to the internal order doctrine. And that is embodied in a number of bilateral agreements that go back for centuries. The -- the treaty that was at issue in the Wildenhus's Case expressly said that if the -- if the conduct did not relate to members of the crew but to passengers or other members of the port state or otherwise affected the interests of the port state, that the port state law would apply. And that is the general rule. The international regime that governs this area by its terms provide minimum standards and leaves it available to port states and to flag states to add additional requirements. That would mean --
 Mr. Salmons, one of the alternatives you threw out, not as a response to clear statement, but as a -- a response to the issue that was being raised by it, was the provision of the statute that it was intended to exercise the -- the fullest extent of the -- of the commerce power. And The -- The Bahamas respond to that by saying you could have said exactly -- or argued exactly the same thing in McCulloch. What is your response to that?
 Well, I -- I would disagree with that on -- on a couple of respects. The first is that the definition of commerce here is broader than it was and specifically refers to travel between the United States and foreign countries. The only other statute we're aware of that says that is title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In addition --
 Well, may I just ask you a -- a factual question? I didn't go back to the text to check this. Does the text of this statute say in these words basically we are exercising the fullest possible extent of the commerce power?
 Absolutely, Justice Souter. What -- what the text of the statute says --
 And it's not in McCulloch.
 That's correct. What the text of this statute says is that -- in fact, this is the definition of commerce that relates only to title III of ADA. And it says precisely that it includes travel between foreign countries and the United States and that Congress was intending to -- to reach the full sweep of its -- its constitutional authority.
 Thank you, Mr. Salmons. Mr. Frederick.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case is about congressional intent not congressional power. Congress undoubtedly has the power --
 Could you address the last point?
 Yes. It was not the fullest extent of the commerce power. That statute was at issue in this Court's case concerning the Lanham Act where the Court said that a violation of the Lanham Act that occurred in Mexico but had an effect in the United States was intended to be covered by Congress because that commerce clause, Justice Souter, did state to the fullest extent of Congress' power under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. This statute does not say that. This statute talks about commerce in and between States and territories, and it is much closer to the statute language that this Court addressed in the ARAMCO case where --
 So it -- it doesn't have the fullest extent language then.
 That's correct. That's correct.
 How does it compare to title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964?
 Well, there are slight differences in the language, but I don't think that's dispositive because title VII of the Civil Rights Act, which this Court addressed in the ARAMCO case, the Court -- the Chief Justice's opinion there said that that language was not enough to express the intent.
 So that would be the same for title II, which is the public accommodations part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. So I take it that you are saying that on these foreign-flagged vessels, just as the ADA would be inapplicable, so title II, the public accommodations part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, would be inapplicable.
 It's all a question of congressional intent, Justice Ginsburg, and there's no indication of an intent that Congress needed to address any problem that arose with respect to that form of discrimination.
 So your -- but your answer is, there being no such indication, that a ship putting in at a U.S. port was free to discriminate among its passengers on the basis of race.
 Well, there would be no U.S. congressional statute that would address that, Justice Ginsburg. There would be a violation of the Bahamian constitution which prohibits --
 I'm asking about the U.S. law and policy which says no segregation, no discrimination in places of public accommodation.
 As I said, I'm not aware that there has ever been an instance of that in the cruise industry. Congress has not addressed that. We're talking about foreign ships here. And I want to get back to the structural features of the ship because the ADA fundamentally --
 Well, but this is a good question, and what is your position? That the ship could engage in racial discrimination while in U.S. ports on the selling of tickets and the provision of accommodations while in U.S. ports and within the 3 --
 Justice O'Connor, our position is that Congress has not spoken to the question, and so there is no congressional statute that is on point.
 Then your answer, I take it, is yes, it can discriminate and it can discriminate because Congress has not told it not to. Is that it?
 No. No. Our position is that it can't discriminate because a different law proscribes that --
 So far as United States law is concerned, it could.
 Yes.
 And the same answer for 1981?
 Justice Ginsburg, as I said, Congress has not extended its laws to the full reach of U.S. territorial power, and this Court has maintained that position ever since the Charming Betsy case 200 years ago, The Schooner Exchange case, and Brown v. Duchesne.
 Well, let's put it this way. So my understanding of your answer is that we could write an opinion ruling for you but leaving these other questions open? I don't see how we can do that.
 What you say, Justice Kennedy, is that the clear statement canon requires Congress to say when it intends to apply a law to a foreign vessel. Congress didn't do that.
 But if I'm writing the opinion and I put that down and rule for you, it seems to me that I then answered necessarily Justice Ginsburg's question in the negative.
 You do, Justice Kennedy. And just as this Court in the ARAMCO case said that title VII doesn't apply to the foreign -- work in a foreign land by an American company of an American --
 But these --
 Justice Kennedy, Congress hasn't extended criminal laws of the United States to the full reach of U.S. power. It is only proscribed 15 offenses that will apply in the special maritime jurisdiction.
 Mr. Frederick, this is -- this is what concerns me about your answer. I know that Mr. Goldstein took the position that it doesn't matter what kind of operation this is, but the operation that we're dealing with, it sells tickets mainly to -- what percentage of its passengers are from the USA?
 Approximately two-thirds to three-quarters in any given year.
 And does it normally start the voyage and end it in U.S. ports?
 The majority of them do.
 And how much of its advertising budget is pitched at U.S. customers?
 Justice Ginsburg, there -- all of those questions are going to be answered as a predominant marketing effort, et cetera is directed to the U.S. market.
 Well, this is the anomaly. You're asking us to buy an interpretation. An enterprise is U.S.-centered in terms of where it gets its business and that enterprise, nonetheless, is not bound by what is our bedrock anti-discrimination law both with regard to customers, passengers, and employment.
 And the reason, Justice Ginsburg, is that that law imposes structural changes on vessels that go to other ports.
 Why don't you -- why don't you try to draw that line? Why don't you say that just as the applicability or not may depend upon whether you're dealing with a crew of a foreign ship or whether you're dealing with an American who happens to be injured on board that ship, so also it may depend upon whether the anti-discrimination law in question is one that at least in some of its applications requires structural changes or not? That would enable you to say the ADA doesn't apply, but would not compel you to say that title II doesn't apply.
 We are talking --
 You're not willing to take such a limited position.
 Well, Justice Scalia, I think the Court could certainly carve out in its clear -- articulation of the clear statement principle some of these lines. It becomes very --
 Well, the ADA itself makes an exception for things that aren't readily achievable. I mean, you could certainly lean on that because a structural change probably isn't readily achievable.
 Justice O'Connor, Congress, when it talked about readily achievable, did so in terms of cost. It didn't do so in terms of conflict with the laws of other nations or --
 Is there -- is there -- I mean, you're giving me the answer I thought the other side would give me. All right? And I appreciate it actually. (Laughter.)
 You say that two-thirds of these people, the customers, are American. So we're dealing with a business that is primarily American, not a business like the Swiss ship except with the exceptional cases. Then you say, all right, still it's a problem because of structural changes we'll have to make. What changes? That is to say, I would have thought I could have read, but I haven't, that other countries like Europe also have discrimination laws against disabled people, and therefore, given that fact and given the document that Mr. Goldstein produced, it is highly unlikely that your clients will have to make any significant structural change that they wouldn't have had to make anyway.
 That's --
 Now, what's the response to that?
 Well, that's completely false. In -- in the year 2000, the United States Government issued a report that contained an extensive appendix, which we've cited in our brief, that details in laborious detail the conflicts between land-based ADA standards and SOLAS. Now, I can give you some specifics, if you would -- that are fairly practical, such as the ADA requires under the interpretation advanced by the petitioners that there be a disabled access cabin on every level of the ship, but SOLAS requires that passengers with disabilities be placed near evacuation points.
 Why -- why can't you just fight that battle by battle on what's reasonably achievable? Because in order to avoid that problem, what you're telling us is that a cruise line can charge a -- a disabled person double the price --
 As a matter of fact --
 -- because they're a nuisance. And that's your position.
 Justice Kennedy, as a matter of fact, we categorically deny the claims of discrimination here. We're having to fight this on the basis of assuming the -- the allegations are true, but they are categorically false. And --
 But it doesn't matter what you want to do as a matter of good will. The question is what the law requires you to do, and you're saying it's up to us, we govern. You're not governed by U.S. anti-discrimination law.
 Justice Ginsburg, what the other side wants is a case-by-case method of decision-making in which a district judge becomes the special master of the cruise industry so that each claim of discrimination that would require some modification to the ship --
 That happens to every employer under -- in the United States under the reasonably achievable standard.
 And that's why, Justice Kennedy, it's a question of congressional intent. The very same Congress debated extensively about whether to impose design requirements on foreign ships in the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, and it decided to buck the international system knowingly by imposing a design requirement that double hulls be imposed on oil tankers, foreign oil tankers.
 Mr. Frederick, that brings up a question I've been meaning to ask you. To what extent was this whole problem of the application of this statute to the foreign vessels discussed in the legislative history of these statutes?
 Zero. There is not one word about vessel --
 All right. If -- if that's so and if you look at the earlier cases -- but all I could get out it is that those earlier cases -- the Court tries to do what it really would have thought Congress would have intended in the circumstances. And if that's so, why wouldn't Congress really have intended that a business that's two-thirds American has to abide by American law?
 Because it was encroaching on an area of foreign sovereignty. Foreign ships are governed by foreign laws.
 Does -- does Britain -- or does Britain or does the European Union, for example, forbid you to charge this double price?
 I don't --
 Does European law -- I'd be surprised if it doesn't forbid it, but do you know?
 I -- I don't know the answer to European law on charging of an additional price, but I would point out that pricing, like evacuation procedures, do go to the structure of the vessel. And we're talking here fundamentally in the ADA about structural changes that they want to impose that go -- when ships travel, they can't dismantle those structural changes when they leave U.S. waters.
 Mr. -- may I ask this question to you? What about a -- an American-flagged ship? Does the statute apply or not?
 Well, the Fifth Circuit reserved that question.
 What is your view?
 Our view is that there are arguments that can be made that it does not because Congress didn't --
 What is your view? Not what arguments can be made. What is your view?
 Well, I think -- (Laughter.)
 No. I think our view is that it doesn't.
 It does not apply.
 It does not apply because Congress didn't express the intent.
 So really, we're not concerned with the fact this is a foreign-flagged ship. You're concerned with the fact it's a ship.
 The -- there's a difference and -- and there are about 1,000 U.S.-flagged ships that carry passengers, so that if Congress had given any thought to the question, it is reasonable to suppose it might have distinguished between U.S. ships for which U.S. law directly governs and foreign ships that are governed by a different law. The fact --
 Do we need -- do we need a clear statement for United States ships? I thought your case rested on a clear statement requirement. Is there any clear statement requirement for U.S. ships?
 No, no, Justice Scalia.
 So why -- why isn't there a clear difference between the two?
 Because there aren't any words in the statute that go to ships. The best they can do is a catchall phrase at the end of bus, rail, and any other means of conveyance.
 Well, that's pretty good, isn't it?
 Well, it's not -- (Laughter.)
 If you don't require a clear statement, that's -- that's good enough, it seems to me.
 Well --
 Your -- your case hangs on the fact that, you know, when Congress wants to -- to rule the world and say all ships in the -- in the world that touch at our ports have to have this kind of a thing, it says so clearly. It doesn't have to say so with perfect clarity with respect to American ships.
 With respect to foreign ships, there is a clear statement rule and that clear statement rule is embodied in the fact that a foreign ship is governed by the law of the flag state where it is registered. That's been the rule for 200 years. And the other side's position --
 Well, is that limited, though, just to things that affect the internal order of the ship? Is that the context in which we've articulated that rule?
 Well, it's been articulated in several different contexts. In the Brown v. Duchesne case, the Court 150 years ago articulated in a patent case where the Court said that a patented device on the ship, which was the French ship in Boston Harbor infringing an American patent-holder, would not apply U.S. patent law. And the Court said, because we can't conceive that Congress would have imagined this general language to encroach on the sovereignty of a foreign ship. Now, the other side has exactly two sentences to say about that case, but that is the case that is directly on point because that case says that when you are dealing with American laws that are generally written, you would not ordinarily apply them to a foreign ship unless Congress said so specifically.
 But -- but in that case, there was -- as I understand it, there was no legal relationship of any sort between the supplier of the patent-infringing object and the ship in the United States. So it at least made sense to classify that with internal order as opposed to external relationships arguably involving -- or implicating American law. You've got exactly the opposite situation here. You've got contracts made in the United States with the foreign cruise line. You didn't have that in your patent case.
 Well, Justice Souter, you have a foreign ship owned by a foreign corporation built in a foreign country under foreign engineering standards --
 With its principal place of business in the United States.
 For a time before that ship moves into another market.
 But --
 But its significant external -- its significant commercial relationships are in the United States with people in the United States performed partially in the United States.
 In just the same way that McCulloch the Court said that labor standards for a course of business that is regular between Honduras and the United States is not going to be sufficient to apply --
 The crew members were Honduran in that case.
 They were.
 This -- if you just look at it, suppose you were not a lawyer and you look at this operation. You'd say that's got USA written all over it. The passengers are from the USA. The company is centered in Florida. And then you have this flag of convenience that it flies which can legitimately govern the relationship with its crew. But to say that it governs the relationship with passengers, it seems to me very strange. And also the ticket says, passenger, if you're going to sue us, it's got to be in the United States and under U.S. law to boot.
 But a choice-of-law clause, Justice Ginsburg, has never been held to incorporate law in the sense that laws that don't apply are going to be incorporated. I'm not aware of any choice-of-law clause that -- that simply takes in every domestic statute.
 Just -- it's just one other indicia that one looks at this operation and says this belongs to the USA. A practical judgment, I think, would come down there.
 And -- and you would have -- under their theory, you would have the Consumer Products Safety Act, the Food and Drug Act, OSHA, all sorts of other statutes of general application that are now going to be imposed on foreign vessels simply because they do a lot of business in the United States. The problem here, as a matter of congressional intent, is we don't know what Congress thought about this, and because Congress --
 Well, we -- we do -- we do have the rule if it -- if it applies to the internal operations of the ship, and so far as the crew is concerned, the Jones Act and OSHA, it seems to me, may well be governed by the law of the flag.
 And the internal operations of the ship, Justice Kennedy, is part and parcel of how it is designed, what are the evacuation points, how are the cabins laid out, what ramps are placed where, how -- everything about the ship's design --
 That's a part of the case I'm not sure about, and it seems to me, again, it can be fought out under the reasonably achievable --
 It doesn't -- Justice Kennedy, the problem with that theory is it just doesn't comport with the language of -- of the statute. Congress didn't think in terms of -- as it did in the Oil Pollution Act, it said, if there's a conflict with international law, work it out. Get the Coast Guard with the foreign nations and work out the conflict. It didn't put anything like that in this statute, which is a further indication that if Congress wants to extend this kind of disability protection, it can do that, but it ought to do so willingly. And the Government has had 13 years to come up with rules that would govern cruise ships, and the best they've done, a few days before the top-side briefs in this case were filed, is to issue proposed draft guidelines for ferries, not cruise ships. Most of the regulations that they are pointing to wouldn't have an application to a large passenger cruise ship. If Congress wants to change this, it certainly has the power, but this Court need not open up a Pandora's box of domestic legislation to apply to foreign ships where Congress has not expressed the intent to do that.
 Could you go back to Justice Breyer's question about the number of foreign ships? Once we get beyond cruise lines, does it -- would -- would the -- the application on your view cover the -- the dozen passengers who decide they want to take a trip on a -- on a cargo boat?
 Yes. I don't perceive a limiting principle to the other side's position. In fact, there's an amicus brief written where there's only one or two stops in the United States a year, and under their view, that ship would be governed by the ADA as well. If -- if Congress wants to enact these limits, it's certainly free to do so, but this is a highly complex area and ships are different from land-based accommodations because you have to be able to evacuate people within 30 minutes. And so when we train people, we have --
 But doesn't it -- on the other -- on the other side of the coin, apart from the structural problem -- and I understand the arguments on both sides there. With respect to things like safety drills and access to gambling tables and all that, it seems to me that your answer to that would be, well, we'll just do that once we're on the high seas so there's no conflict with the statute when we're out there.
 As a matter of fact, Justice Stevens, we give evacuation drills to the disabled in a different way. We have special access and assistance squads that go to persons with physical challenges to get them off the vessel in an event of a -- a need for evacuation. That's a different procedure than most passengers, but it's -- it is one that is in place.
 Thank you, Mr. Frederick. Mr. Garre.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Applying title III of the Americans With Disabilities Act to foreign-flagged vessels would invite precisely the sort of international discord, conflict, and confusion that Congress presumably seeks to avoid when it writes American laws.
 Do you agree with Mr. Frederick's answer about title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1964? I mean, a lot of countries don't prohibit discrimination.
 Justice Ginsburg, first let me make clear that the Bahamian Government does and all of its cruise vessels are governed by that prohibition.
 I'm asking about the application of U.S. law.
 We think that that question can be resolved along the lines that Justice Scalia suggested, which is that when you're dealing with a matter that goes to the internal affairs of the ship -- and there -- we would suggest that there is more central to the internal affairs of the ship than its construction and design. Under international law, article 94 of the Law of -- Law of the Sea Convention, which the Bahamian Government has ratified -- and by the way, the United States has not, and that's an important principle for this Court to keep in mind -- foreign-flagged states may be bound by different international treaties than the United States. So simply trying to draw some conflict resolution device that would deal with treaties that the United States has entered into, international nations have not will not address that problem.
 So before you go on to that, I want to be clear on your answer to title II of the Civil Rights Act of '64. There's -- you say, well, that's easier to comply with. But that's not the principle under which you're operating.
 No. With respect, Justice Ginsburg, our principle is that when it comes to the matters that under international law have been traditionally governed by the flag state, then when Congress writes its laws, we presume that unless Congress clearly indicates an affirmative intention to address those matters, it did not intend to. When Congress wrote the ADA, not a word of the statute indicates that it considered the international repercussions of applying that law to foreign-flagged vessels. Not a word --
 What about the -- what about the full sweep argument? Let's sort of come full circle on that. You -- you say the full sweep argument is no good because the same thing could have been made in McCulloch. The response was there is a textual difference --
 What's -- what's the full sweep argument? I don't --
 Full sweep of the commerce power.
 Justice Souter, first of all, it's -- it -- the statute doesn't say full sweep. It says sweep, and that's in the findings of the ADA. It's reprinted on page 32 of petitioners' brief. And second of all, the definition of Congress, which doesn't contain that sweep language, is almost identical to the definition of commerce in McCulloch, which is on page 15, note 3 of that decision, and that definition, the United States argued in the McCulloch case, was not sufficient to extend U.S. labor laws to foreign-flagged vessels. It's important to understand the -- the potential international conflicts that extending the ADA to foreign-flagged vessels could create. There are more than 40 nations that have adopted anti-discrimination laws for the disabled. Three nations have -- have adopted laws for domestic vessels: Britain, Canada, and Australia. If a country like the United States extended its laws to foreign vessels that entered its ports, then other nations may well follow suit. And if you take a simple hypothetical example, the Queen Mary II traveling from South Hampton to New York, if you look at the guidelines that Britain has adopted for domestic vessels, those guidelines contain different structural and design requirements than the draft guidelines that the United States have promulgated. There are different requirements for door widths. There are different requirements for sloping. There's different requirements for the watertight compartments. There are different requirements about whether vessels have to be -- have accessible cabins all throughout the ship.
 When you say different, you mean you cannot comply with both.
 Well --
 Is that what you mean? Or -- or are those just minimums and -- and the United States would -- would comply with those minimums?
 Justice Scalia, I think in some you could and in others you couldn't. And -- and that's an important -- important point.
 And incidentally just for the -- are -- this ship has -- these are regulations that help the disabled?
 Yes, Your -- yes, Your Honor. And -- and in many cases, it's not going to be clear which regulation is going to be more accommodating to the disabled and which is not.
 Could they work that out? That is, if two-thirds of our universe really is American-based, in terms of customers, and we're now only talking about conflicts in -- real conflicts that -- that affect, say, one-third of the universe, that's also true in areas like antitrust or others where the enforcement authorities get together and they try to write memoranda that -- that work this out in a reasonable way. Could -- could the same thing happen here if such real conflicts did emerge?
 We don't think so, Justice Breyer.
 Because?
 We would take the same approach that this Court emphasized in -- in the McCulloch case, which is that kind of ad hoc balancing analysis would wreak havoc for the question whether a significant regulation like the ADA would apply to a vessel. How would foreign vessels know, when they enter U.S. ports, whether they have to undertake the extraordinary changes --
 The answer would be yes, you do. You do have to, and then if there's some other authority that wants to get involved in this, the two authorities would work it out.
 Justice Breyer, the way that those issues are worked out in the international shipping context is through the International Maritime Organization. This organization has been responsible for crafting scores of conventions, hundreds of shipping codes, and it's already begun to address the issue of accessibility on ships for the disabled and the elderly. We cite the 1996 guidelines in our brief. Those guidelines right now are -- are not binding guidelines, but they could well become binding guidelines. And when an organization like the IMO addresses this question, it resolves --
 That's perfect because then the Government says that once it becomes a matter of binding international rule, anything that conflicts with that will be viewed as not reasonably achievable. So all you have to do is that and then there's no longer a problem with American law, according to them.
 Well, we don't think the readily achievable language in the first case in any way contemplates conflicts with international law. This Court has a separate canon that's almost as old as the country that it presumes Congress doesn't intend to interfere with international obligations or international laws, including customary international law, as you wrote for the Court last term in -- in the Empagran case. We presume that American legislatures give respect to the interests of sovereign nations when they write their laws, and we don't assume that Congress intends to intrude on the sovereign interests of other nations. And that's what extending the ADA to foreign-flagged ships would do. The Bahamian Government has a solemn responsibility under international law and under its own law to govern the construction and design of all flags of all ships that fly -- fly its flags. Article 10 of the Geneva Convention on the High Seas recognizes that flag states have responsibility for the construction and design of ships. Article 94 of the Law of the Sea Conventions specifies that flag states have responsibility over administrative, technical, and labor matters, including construction and design matters. These are precisely the sorts of matters that for centuries the flag state has been responsible for. And in the Brown v. Duchesne case, this Court recognized that, a case that dealt with the application of patent laws to the construction and design of a foreign-flagged vessels. There are going to be conflicts within -- between international law and the requirements of the ADA, but first of all, there's going to be confusion. It's been more than a decade since the ADA was passed, and we don't even have final regulations as to what rules apply. And in the meantime, foreign-flagged vessels are going to have to be reviewing the case law in the United States courts, determining on a vessel-by-vessel, design specification-by-design specification as to what standards apply. That's only going to create additional international discord and confusion. Petitioners proposed solution to this problem we think is telling. They urge this Court in their reply brief if there is a problem after the ADA is extended to foreign-flagged ships and other nations begin to follow suit and you have a crazy made -- maze of different regulations applying to construction and design, then at that point, the United States can go to the IMO and ask it to clean up the mess. With respect, we think they have it backwards. The purpose of the IMO and the international framework that exists for governing regulation of shipping is to establish a uniform set of rules in the first instance. The IMO has already begun to address the problem at issue in this case, accessibility for the disabled. They are available to address that in a multilateral fashion. And Congress, in enacting the ADA, gave no indication that it weighed any of the international repercussions of the action that petitioners urges the case -- petitioners urge the Court to take in this case. And we would urge this Court to return this matter to Congress. Congress is in the position to weigh the risk of international confusion, to weigh the potential for international discord and to address those matters as it sees -- sees fit. If there are no further questions.
 Thank you, Mr. Garre. Mr. Goldstein, you have about 40 seconds.
 Justice Breyer and Justice Ginsburg, our position is the one that can accommodate your concerns. Theirs cannot. Just like in Empagran, where this Court built in comity considerations, relying on cases like Lauritzen that involved foreign-flagged ships, it said, look, even if the text of the Sherman Act or the FTAIA could literally reach it, in these cases that we don't think Congress could have conceived of, we're not going to apply the statute. But here, we have a situation in which this company has 95 percent of its cruises going in and out from the United States. Millions of people, and billions of dollars in commerce are affected by this statute and Americans that Congress had to have in mind.
 Thank you, Mr. Goldstein. The case is submitted.
 We'll now hear argument in the case of Tenet against John Doe. Mr. Clement.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case, like the Totten case almost 130 years ago, is at bottom an effort by alleged spies to obtain additional compensation for services rendered.
 Now, do you take the position that the Federal Government couldn't enforce any provision of such an agreement either?
 That's correct. That's correct, Justice O'Connor, with respect to the kind of espionage arrangements and contracts we're talking about.
 Well, suppose -- suppose somebody, allegedly a former spy, is alleged to -- by the Government to have breached the agreement by writing and publishing a tell-all book about it.
 Well, Justice O'Connor, I think that actually points up the important differences between the way that the CIA deals with its employees and the way that it deals with its espionage agents like respondents are alleged to be.
 Yes, okay.
 With respect to espionage agents --
 Would the Government be without any recourse if it was an alleged espionage agent?
 I believe that's true, Justice O'Connor, because the espionage agents do not sign prepublication review agreements. They do not receive formal security clearances the way that an employee does. And unlike an employee, they do not have access to a broad swath of classified information that raises attendant counterintelligence concerns. And so if you think about the course of dealing that the agency has with its employees, the employees are able to sue the agency in court under, for example, title VII, and the agency can turn around and sue their employees to enforce things like the prepublication review agreement that was issue -- at issue in this Court's Snepp decision. So in the employment context, I think it's very difficult to say that there's an implied term of the employment contract that either side will not have judicial recourse.
 But what if the employment contract is with an American citizen to act as an espionage agent and nobody else knew about it. Would -- would that -- would he be treated as an espionage agent or as an employee?
 If I understand your hypothetical, Justice Stevens, I think that individual would be treated as an espionage agent if it's just somebody for sort of a one-off assignment. And I think that -- that is illustrated by this Court's decision in Totten. I mean, William Lloyd, for example, was a U.S. citizen. He agreed with President Lincoln to engage in espionage activities in the south. And this Court held that when the estate of -- of Mr. Lloyd came to seek compensation from a court, that there was no judicial remedy to enforce that alleged agreement, and the remedy, if any, lay with the President's contingent fund.
 I -- I'd like your help on this. Your interpretation of Totten -- does it say that there is just no actionable contract, or does it say there's no jurisdictions like political question? I mean, you win under any of those theories, if we accept them. But which is it?
 Well, Justice Kennedy, it's a difficult question to answer because I think there are a lot of different strains underlying the Totten decision, and I think there is --
 Yes, but you need to get to whether there is -- do you urge dismissal for lack of jurisdiction in the district court or a dismissal on the merits? It's not clear to me at all.
 Well, Justice O'Connor, I think it's better understood as simply a rule of dismissal, that it's not really a pure jurisdictional defect. It's been referred alternatively as a jurisdictional bar or as a rule of dismissal, and of course, as this Court reminded us recently in the Kontrick decision, people tend to use terms like jurisdiction loosely in these contexts.
 Well, I'm -- I'm not going away with a clear idea of your position.
 Well --
 Do I -- do I -- does the Government file under 12(b)(1) like a jurisdiction, 12(b)(6), no cause of action? Of course, you'd probably do both, but I -- I want to know --
 Well --
 -- what your best thinking is of what Totten means. It seems to me that this just means that there can be no contract formed under these circumstances.
 Justice Kennedy, I think the general practice of the Government is to file under both. I believe that's what happened here. I think the fact that we file under both suggests that there is a little bit of confusion about it. I would tend to agree with you it's better understood as a rule of dismissal under 12(b)(6) because if you think about the Totten decision, there's really two strains to the decision. One is a recognition that the claim to relief necessarily depends on a fact that the law has always regarded as secret, and in a sense that case simply can't proceed. And that's very analogous to this Court's holding in Weinberger against Catholic Action. There's a second strain to the case, though, and that is that the very idea of walking into court and filing the action is inconsistent with an implied term of the contract or, indeed, the whole nature of the espionage relationship. And I think particularly if you emphasize that second strain of the Totten decision, I think it's better understood as a 12(b)(6) dismissal because what you're really saying is somebody is walking into court and they are effectively pleading themselves out of court because as -- if you look at this complaint here, it starts out with a recitation of the fact that these individuals allegedly engaged in espionage activities and that they were denied certain promises that were made to them after they carried out, quote, their end of the bargain.
 If there's no cause of action, there's nothing to -- to claim on, what's -- what's the closest analogy? Is it like a promise to make a gift, which is unenforceable? Is there kind of a contract analogy that we can use?
 I -- I mean, I -- you know, one -- one way of thinking about it, but I think it's a very rough analogy, is it's almost like an unlawful contract. It's a contract that the law just doesn't recognize. And I think that -- that reflects the underlying reality of these cases, which is there is something inherent in an espionage relationship that when you enter an espionage relationship, you understand that you have no protected status under the law. I think that has, with respect, been clear in the -- not just in the Totten decision but from the very beginning of the republic. I mean, ever since Nathan Hale agreed to cross British lines as a spy, it was understood that he had no legal recourse, that he had a status that was not recognized at the law. And I think that is -- it has always been thus, and I think there is no reason to revisit the --
 Does -- does that mean -- the no legal recourse at all mean that you could torture an agent if you were dissatisfied with his work performance?
 I -- I don't believe that's true, Justice Stevens, and what I would distinguish is between a constitutional claim that an -- an agent -- an alleged agent might have that doesn't depend on the espionage relationship. As I would understand your question, I mean, it would -- there would be a -- a substantive due process claim that anybody could bring if the Government tortured them. They wouldn't have to allege that I had a secret espionage relationship with the Government and then they tortured me. That would be irrelevant to their claim.
 Could I -- could I bring you back to your -- your earlier discussion of a spy who is also a -- a Government employee? Are you telling me that he -- he cannot sue for his regular salary simply because the work he was doing was -- was espionage? I mean, he's -- he's a GS-whatever, GS-16, and the Government just doesn't send him his monthly check.
 Well, Justice --
 He has no recourse for that check just because he's been doing spy work?
 No, that's not the position, and -- and I -- and I apologize if I gave that impression in answering Justice Stevens' hypothetical. I understood to be the hypothetical that you had a Government employee who engaged in a separate spy endeavor, if you will, and then tried to sue to collect on the damages owed under that -- for that particular endeavor.
 Okay, not -- not for his regular GS salary.
 No. My -- my hypothetical was an individual who's not a Government employee but is hired by the Government to engage in espionage activities.
 Exactly. And as I indicated to you earlier, Justice Stevens -- that in a sense that's not a hypothetical. That's the Totten decision itself. William Lloyd was -- or at least alleged that he was employed by President Lincoln to engage in those services. And in answer to Justice Scalia's question, if William Lloyd happened to be an employee of the -- of the Comptroller of Currency or something, he could still sue to get whatever remedies he had --
 He couldn't get the 5,000 bonus for being a spy. Right?
 That's exactly right. No bonus dollars for being a spy under those circumstances.
 Could you clarify on the employment question something else? It's -- it's in your reply brief and you say you're contrasting this type of claim with a title VII claim which -- in which you say that the Court in Webster relied on the CIA's historical practice of litigating employment disputes. The CIA's historical practice, not the Court's rulings. Are you suggesting that even with respect to employment litigation, it's up to the CIA to decide what its practice will be?
 I don't think so, Justice Ginsburg, but the point is that the reason that -- that I think that the Government would have had almost no ability to invoke a Totten-type defense in Webster or in a title VII case is because of its course of dealing with its employees. And I suppose that if the agency completely changed its course of dealing with respect to its employees or entered a very different course of dealing with certain select employees, then a Totten defense might become available in those circumstances. But as I indicated earlier, I think if you look at the overall nature of the agency's relationship and rights vis-a-vis its employees, even its covert ones, that's a very different relationship than the agency has with respect to espionage agents. And again, that's because they enter contracts with them. Each side has certain litigation rights, and I think it would be a bit of a stretch for the Government to come in and say that there's an implied term of that employment agreement that forecloses a judicial remedy.
 May I --
 I guess the Government can't enforce -- cannot enforce these contracts either. Right? I mean, you take the good with the -- the bad with the good?
 That's exactly right, Justice Scalia.
 You've never sued a spy to -- who hasn't carried out his mission?
 Certainly not -- I'm not aware of such a suit, and I've been told by the agency that it's impossible. And I think it just reflects the nature of these agreements, and it does -- it --
 Can -- can we go back to the -- another threshold question? You did press below and Judge Tallman urged that the reason this case can't be in the district court in California, or wherever, is it has to be in the Federal Circuit. This is a contract claim against the Government. Are you abandoning that position?
 Yes, Justice Ginsburg, in fact we have abandoned it. We abandoned that position at the cert stage. We made that clear to the Court in our certiorari papers, and we don't renew any type of jurisdictional objection at this stage.
 Are you free -- are you free to abandon it? Is the -- is the Government's surrender of its immunity from suit for contracts, provided that the suit is brought in the Federal Circuit -- is that something that you are free -- Congress having said that, that the executive is free to say, well, we could take advantage of that, but we don't want to?
 Justice Ginsburg, I think the answer to that is that it probably is jurisdictional in the pure sense and so if this Court disagreed with our view that there wasn't a Tucker Act problem, this Court could reach that issue and send the case back on the Tucker Act grounds. So maybe I could explain to you why it is that we think that there's not a Tucker Act problem, at least at this stage of the litigation. The Ninth Circuit's reasoning on this was a little bit oblique, but as I understand it, there were two parts to it. First of all, that there might be some kind of substantive due process claim here that did not depend on the contract but rather somehow stemmed from the fact that there was some endangerment of these individuals and that gave rise to some substantive due process right. And even if that claim, as the Ninth Circuit recognized, is not one that is formed on the contract or an implied contract, it seems to me that that's a claim that's clearly within the coverage of the Totten doctrine because it is inherent in the espionage relationship that the individual will be engaged in a -- in a situation where they will be endangered. And I think that was certainly true of William Lloyd in the Totten case. When he crossed southern lines, he was very much endangered, and that's something that wasn't lost on President Lincoln. In footnote 3 of our opening brief, we have a quotation from President Lincoln about the inherent dangers of spies crossing lines and the need for secrecy to protect that. So that's why I think that claim is properly understood as not being covered by the Tucker Act and not being required to be brought in the Court of Claims, but nonetheless a claim that is barred by the Totten doctrine. The other point they made was with respect to the specific regulations that the agency has internally, and they suggest that there might be a claim here that was based on the regulations independent of the contract. But in order for that claim to go forward, the Court would have to examine the unredacted version of the regulations. And even if the Court is right that there's a need for further proceedings on that question, it makes no sense to interpret the doctrine in a way that requires the Government to wait to assert a Totten defense until there is a jurisdictional question cleared up that actually requires discovery because I think what Totten recognized is -- is there is a need to dismiss the claim at the outset before any discovery because of the nature of the suit. So for those two reasons, we thought that the -- that the better view was that the Tucker Act problem was either not presented because of the substantive due process claim or not ripe and that we would pursue the Totten act.
 That -- that would make a lot of sense if you really felt that what Totten is is -- is a dismissal on the merits, just saying there's -- there's no contractual claim. I -- I mean, if you didn't believe that, if -- if you believed that what Totten says is we have no jurisdiction, then we'd have no problem and we could resolve all of the questions. But it seems to me if you believe that Totten is based mainly -- you know, it's a contract case and said the contract is just totally invalid, we shouldn't be reaching the contract issue. We should simply say that if -- if we agree with you, that there's no substantive due process claim here and -- and no claim based on the regulations. How do we get the authority to decide the -- the contract question?
 Well, I think whatever the status the contract question has, whether it's 12(b)(1) or 12(b)(6), I think it's a -- it's a threshold issue and I think this Court under the Rohrgas authority can reach that issue at the outset. And I think it would be particularly perplexing to have a doctrine that said that when we have a suit that we know on the face of the complaint cannot be brought in any court, that we are going to not reach that issue in favor of trying to determine first which court it properly belongs in, when that inquiry in fact will get us into the exact classified information that we know at the outset the suit should not involve in the first place. And I think there is enough flexibility in this Court's Rohrgas decision to allow the Court to reach that threshold question first.
 And you're saying that if there's no contract, then there's no substantive liberty to protect under the -- under due process procedures.
 I -- I think that follows, Justice Kennedy. I think one of the difficulties with the constitutional theory that's advanced on the other side is it gives -- it seeks a right to enforce internal procedural handling mechanisms for claims that we know there's no legitimate expectation for their enforcement at all. And it seems odd that this would develop in a way where the procedural rights somehow trump the substantive rights, and we know from Totten that there is no substance here that can be brought forward in the courts. I think in this respect it is also important to recognize that, as a practical matter, an agent who's negotiating in the shadow of the Totten decision and the broader understanding that Totten reflects is likely to seek assurances not just about compensation but about how -- how their claims would be heard by the CIA and how they're going to get their compensation. And I think there's no particular reason to think procedural assurances should be judicially enforceable when the substantive assurances are not. Now, one other point to make about the nature of these agreements. Not only because of the nature of these agreements does the agency end up in a position where it cannot enforce these contracts itself through judicial actions, but it also ends up in a situation where it may have to give up-front payments that it otherwise wouldn't have to give and the like. So there are consequences to both sides of dealing in this way with these espionage relationships as effectively outside the law. But again, it has always been thus, and I think there is no principle in -- in any recent development that requires this Court to revisit the rule of Totten which, as I said, suggests an -- it reflects an understanding that date backs -- dates back much further. If I can make one other point, which is I think even though the Totten decision reflects something more than the state secrets privilege, because there's a more fundamental defect with a suit that's premised on an espionage agreement than just the fact that it tends to compromise secret information, it is true that applying the Totten rule of dismissal does provide a clear mechanism that protects confidential information. And I would analogize it to this Court's decision in Snepp where the Court adopted a constructive trust arrangement. The Court adopted that arrangement where -- where an employee who violated a -- a prepublication review agreement had to turn over all the proceeds to the Government. And -- and the Court adopted that remedy in favor of a damages remedy, and the Court did so to send a clear signal to the employees that there is no incentive whatsoever to violate the terms of these agreements. In the same way, having a clear rule of dismissal sends a clear message to espionage agents that there's no point in even bothering to file the suit in the first place. It will simply be dismissed.
 Mr. Clement, the --
 Mr. --
 Go ahead. I'm sorry.
 I just wanted to ask one. I don't remember whether the briefs discuss it or not, but is there a statute that prohibits the disclosure of secret agents like this and does that -- if so, does that have any relevance to this case?
 Justice Stevens, there is such a statute. There's a statutory provision that gives the authority. It had been with the -- with the Director of Central Intelligence. The recent Intelligence Reform Act has transferred it to the Director of National Intelligence. But it gives a requirement that the -- that -- that the director protect sources and methods. I think that that -- that statutory provision is consistent with the general notion behind the Totten doctrine, but I don't think it's --
 And does the statute impose a penalty on anyone for revealing the name of a secret agent?
 I don't think it -- it certainly doesn't impose any kind of monetary penalty. There are, under certain circumstances, criminal penalties for the disclosure of classified information, but I think that the --
 But is the identity of an agent a -- a type of classified information protected by the statute?
 I think it is. It's protected both by the sources and method provision, and I think revelation of a source could implicate the -- the criminal prohibitions in the statute as well. And I think that this statute -- I think you can see the extent to which this -- this case implicates the core of the secrets that the agency has. This Court in the Sims case described the sources and methods protected by the statute as the heart of the intelligence community.
 Mr. Clement --
 And this case involves both.
 -- the -- the argument made by the other side, which seems to me has some plausibility to it, is that Totten was decided in an age when courts were not as flexible as they are today. We -- we have procedures for matters being kept confidential by courts. We -- we allow hearings that are closed in matters that never would have been done before. And since, the argument goes, the -- the only purpose of Totten was to preserve the secrets, why can't we preserve the secrets that way? If and when it turns out that the prosecution of this -- of this suit would require a secret to be disclosed, we will terminate it or -- but -- but up until then, why -- why decide in advance? Why not take a -- take a run at it and see?
 Well, Justice Scalia, there's a couple of points to be made about that. One, as this Court recognized in Reynolds -- in the Reynolds state secrets context itself, even the provisions of going forward, no matter what innovations have been made, the -- the provisions of going forward and handling classified information necessarily involve risks that the information will be disclosed. In the first place, both Totten and the state secrets privilege itself are premised on the notion that the information, if it is in fact privileged, is withheld from the case. It's an absolute privilege. So the idea is not that you have some sort of limited disclosure to the court personnel and to the ultimate fact-finder in the case and that's somehow all consistent with the state secrets privilege. To the contrary. Once a determination is made that a matter is state secrets, there's no further disclosure of the information. You -- the whole premise of state secrets is not that you try to prevent ultimate disclosure to the general public. It's that once something is privileged, you -- you treat the matter as privileged and you take it out of the case.
 But you're not making that statement with respect to anything that's classified. There was something in your brief, reply brief, at 18 and 19 in which you -- you cite Reynolds and you say the proper response to classified information in civil litigation is to disregard the classified information, not to order partial disclosure to court personnel. Are -- are you saying then in all of civil litigation if information is classified, then it's just out of the case?
 Justice Ginsburg, I think there can be certain arrangements in certain civil litigation where the Government can agree with a party to proceed -- as part of their overall agreement, to proceed on the basis of classified information, but that would involve a very different way of -- of proceeding than the normal default rules. And I think absent some kind of agreement for the Government to proceed in that way, the default rule in civil litigation has always been that the privilege is just that. It's -- the matter is -- the matter is privileged and it's taken out of the case.
 Yes. But you lose. I mean, if -- if that matter is necessary for your case, don't -- don't you lose?
 Absolutely not, Justice Scalia, not in civil litigation. And that's why the state secrets privilege is, I mean, quite a remarkable doctrine in the civil side of the case.
 You're talking about civil only.
 Only civil.
 I'm thinking of gray mail. Certainly in the criminal -- criminal area, that isn't the case.
 That's exactly right, Justice Scalia.
 You either cough it up or you lose.
 Right, and a different bargain has been reached in the criminal context, and in that context to ameliorate the consequence of the sometimes difficult choice of revealing classified information or proceeding, the Congress has come through with the Classified Information Procedures Act. That only applies in the criminal side, though.
 I just want to ask one question. Don't they have a claim interpreted favorably to them that this has nothing to do with a contract, totally nothing? Okay? But there happen to be some rules over there in the CIA in their books somewhere, which we've never read, and they say when we use a foreign person as a spy, we'll pay him some money or we give him something. We have some procedures. Now, we don't have to do that as a matter of contract. We don't have to do it at all, but we do it. And so there's a claim here that we want to see that they're following their own rules. They say Totten doesn't apply to that because Totten is about contracts. Our claim isn't about contracts.
 Justice Breyer, I have two responses to that. The first is I think the -- that the Totten doctrine extends more broadly than just the narrow confines of the contract.
 But it doesn't extend to torts, does it?
 I would -- I mean, I would need a specific hypothetical. I can't imagine a tort that by its nature --
 Oh, you go --
 -- depends on the relationship.
 You go ahead. You go ahead.
 I can't imagine a tort that depends on its very nature on the relationship. But we're talking about regulations that, as I understand the other side's allegations, are regulations for handling secret contracts. So unless one can allege that they were a party to a secret contract or at least a secret relationship, there's no point in that individual even being in a position -- they wouldn't even have standing to challenge the regulation.
 So -- so you're saying if in fact, when you look at those allegations, they're about regulations for handling secret contracts, it's about a contract, but if there were to be an allegation that it has nothing to do with the contract at all, it's just a way we handle retired foreign spies, Smiley for example, or someone like that. It has nothing to do with it, you see. Then could they -- what would be the rules then?
 I still think the answer would be that there would be no relief under that circumstance because their -- their -- still their claim to having any entitlement under those rules at all would -- I mean, you know, total strangers don't have rights under those regulations. Alleged spies would have rights under those regulations, and the very idea of walking into court and asserting your rights as an alleged spy is inconsistent with the entire relationship and the contract that gave rise to it. I would also point you to the Weinberger decision, Weinberger against Catholic Action, because there this Court applied Totten to not force the Navy to produce an environmental impact statement even though there were regulations on the book -- and the concurring Justices focused on those regulations -- where the Department of Defense said we do produce an environmental impact statement even if it's classified. So I think on the authority of Weinberger as well, the very fact that there are internal regulations on a subject, the entire subject matter of which is secret, doesn't give rise to judicially enforceable rights. If there are no further questions, I'd like to reserve the time for rebuttal.
 Mr. Burman.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: First, with respect to the question about the due process rights below, I would note that the Government does not challenge, and specifically said so in footnote 2 of the petition for cert and footnote 1 in their brief on the merits, whether there is a due process claim here. I would encourage you -- and I will come back to the due process question if you're interested. I'd encourage you to look at the respondents' appendix, pages 72 to 74, where the CIA employee described the fact that there are, in fact, regulations that are not limited to enforcing a secret contract. That is not our claim.
 But they are regulations that the -- that depend upon the existence of a spy-principal relationship --
 Actually we don't believe that's correct, Your Honor. We believe that --
 Well, are you claiming that your -- your people are -- were not spies?
 We allege that they were coerced into that relationship, but we do --
 Well, however got there --
 Correct.
 -- they -- they -- your claim is that they're spies and that, therefore, whatever your procedural claims may be, whatever your substantive due process rights may be, as I understand it, depends upon the assumption of a spy-principal relationship.
 We do not agree with that, Your Honor.
 Why?
 We believe that PL-110 allowed the admission of people essential to the United States without any comment on whether they had formerly been spies and that these regulations do not require us to prove as an essential element even to the CIA, much less to the district court --
 You --
 -- that they were spies for the CIA.
 -- you don't have to prove that they were spies, but you have to prove that -- that they had a contractual relationship with the United States. And the only contractual relationship you're asserting is the relationship of a spy.
 We disagree with that, Your Honor.
 Oh --
 We do not believe -- and in fact, the Ninth Circuit went out of its way to make very clear to the district court that if we try to plead around and base a claim on a contract, the district court should dismiss that.
 Now, wait. What -- what is the basis on which you assert these regulations are applicable to you --
 We --
 -- to your client?
 -- we say that the -- we believe we can show, once we are allowed to proceed -- and it's premature at this time to decide whether we'll be successful in this or not. We believe we can show that the CIA has internal regulations that say as to PL-110 resettlees, we will provide continued financial and security support in these circumstances, a need-based standard.
 And -- and the agency comes in and says, prove that you're a PL-110 resettlee.
 The agency --
 And -- and what is your response to that?
 The agency has never --
 Your response is I was resettled because I was a spy.
 No. We don't have to say that. We can say we were resettled under PL-110, which they have to inform at the time the INS Commissioner that they were bringing in people as PL-110 resettlees. They're not required to tell the INS Commissioner that they were spies, just that they're essential.
 What if -- what if the Government takes a slightly different tack and -- and you bring your essentially PL-110 neutral claim, and the Government says, the only relationship upon which this claim can be based by these particular Does is a spy relationship? We claim privilege, and on the basis of that privilege, we -- we claim dismissal. What is your response to that?
 If that were an essential element of our claim, which we believe it is not --
 Well, they're not saying it's an essential element in the sense that only a spy can make a 110 claim. They're saying that the only basis upon which you can make a 110 claim is the spy relationship. You have no other. How do you respond to that?
 Hence the reason we brought the case as Does. A procedure that was not known for that purpose at the time of Totten, that their own information officer and their brief and their position in Webster admits preserves the identity, preserves the secret. They acknowledge --
 But, look, you're talking about procedural means. I want to know what your immediate response to their claim of privilege is. Are you going to say we weren't spies?
 The advantage of the Reynolds procedure is if they had made the claim of privilege, we would know what they were claiming was privileged.
 They are making the claim of privilege on the ground that the only basis for your 110 claim is or can be, on facts known to them, that your clients were spies. Do you respond by saying, yes, we were spies, or do you respond by saying, we weren't spies?
 We respond by saying we have an entitlement to a fair process within the agency, a confidential process --
 Let's assume that you have a really obnoxious court -- (Laughter.)
 -- that wants a substantive response, do you respond by saying they're right, we're spies, or they're wrong, we weren't spies?
 If their position is that they can't confirm or deny to the district court whether we were spies --
 They are claiming a privilege on the grounds that the only basis for your claim can possibly be the spy relationship based on facts known to them. In order to defeat that privilege, you've got at least to start by saying, no, we weren't spies and we don't claim to be. Are you going to say that or aren't you?
 We are not going to say we were not spies. We are going to --
 Then I don't know why you're not out of court on Totten.
 Because we are not claiming the benefit of a bargain to be a spy. We are not seeking compensation --
 What is a PL --
 You are -- you are --
 What is a PL-110 settlee?
 A PL-110 resettlee allowed the CIA and the FBI to bring in up to 100 people per year that were deemed essential to the U.S. They could have been simply very important scientists who wished to defect.
 Okay. So you would say this --
 They could have been any --
 Are -- are you claiming that your answer to Justice Souter's question is we will assume for purposes of this case -- we're not admitting whether it's true or not, but we're going to assume we're not spies --
 We believe --
 -- because we win even if we're not spies because we are essential persons?
 If we had made the Totten mistake of suing in our own name, we would be out of court, but we have sued as Does and we have said we are satisfied with the CIA concluding internally whether we are entitled to PL-110 status.
 All right, but my guess is -- well, he's pushed you and it sounds like it to me -- that the only basis on which you could say you were an essential person is that you're a spy.
 We don't --
 He's -- he's not a scientist. He's not a --
 Since they have not contested our PL-110 status until a somewhat desperate comment in the reply brief, we have never had to face this question because there has been no question that we are PL-110 resettlees, and that as long as we do not disclose our identity, which we've been careful not to do, unlike Totten, there is no state secret that is -- is at risk.
 But if the question comes up, you're going to have to disclose the identity. I mean, if -- if it is controverted whether indeed you're -- you're a spy or not, then what do you do? Do you say, well, we'll -- we'll do it in camera? That's right? I mean, you -- you think that -- that a United States district court has all of these security facilities available as Langley? I mean --
 We --
 -- trust me, it doesn't.
 We do not believe that we have to have -- that we have to disclose anything to the district court to have standing as Does to seek a fair procedure within the CIA. At the time of Totten, the idea of having a Doe being able to sue was not recognized for a plaintiff who wanted to protect his identity. We have that now as of the last --
 Do we have to change Totten? Because, look, what I'm now thinking is, A, if you're suing on a contract, you win because you're a spy, if you win. If you're suing on promissory estoppel, you win because you're a spy, if you win. If you're suing on PL-110, you win because you're a spy, and if you're suing on due process, you win because you're a spy. So no matter what, you can't win unless you're a spy. Now, they -- they have Totten, and it -- it -- that sounds to me as if you're there. And do we have to overturn Totten for you to win?
 I do not believe so, but you should not expand Totten in the dramatic way the Government asks. And it does not counsel for you to expand Totten when they cannot define a clear line as to where this jurisdictional, which they use in the brief but abandon here -- they cannot explain to you why in Webster -- they argued on pages 37 to 40 of their brief for exactly the same interpretation of Totten that they are arguing now. They specifically said that it should not be up to the courts to look behind the scene of the privilege in Reynolds, and yet the Court rejected that position. In Hamdi, they said there cannot be a secret proceeding with due process and the courts cannot review whether we've made that available, and the Court rejected that. Things have changed since the time of Totten. That does not require overruling Totten, but it certainly does not counsel expanding Totten in the dramatic way that the executive asserts, a way that basically says to the Court you have absolutely no role in determining whether our assertion that the state secret is an essential element here is in fact the case and whether it truly is a state secret. We -- if there's anything we ought to be able to decide it's what our case is about. We may have loosely used bargain in the complaint, but the district court and the Ninth Circuit have now made it very clear that we cannot have a contract claim, we cannot have a due process, whether substantive or procedural, based upon a contract, we cannot have a promissory estoppel claim. The Ninth Circuit has decided all of that against us. What we still have, though, is a claim to a fair, internal agency procedure.
 Attached to what? I mean, you can -- a fair procedure leading nowhere is not a claim. You have a right to a fair procedure because it's attached to some substantive right.
 That's what we haven't yet had the opportunity to prove as to what it is in these regulations. But if you would look at -- again, at the respondents' appendix 72 to 74, the agency's witness that they voluntarily made available, did not make any assertion of privilege, did not make any assertion that this was confidential asked, are there agency regulations that you know of that relate to the resettlement of these PL-110 people who are resettlees from foreign countries? Yes. Are there regulations that deal with the determination of the level and extent of benefits to be given resettlees? Yes. And are there agency regulations that deal with grievances by resettlees? Yes. We think no minimal due process allows them to tell us the wrong standard and not to give us notice and an opportunity to be heard in a confidential proceeding --
 What's --
 You still have --
 -- what's your best case for that? What's your best case for that proposition?
 Well, certainly Matthews v. Eldridge.
 Because it sounds to me like due process in -- in the air.
 We don't believe it is, Your Honor. We -- we don't know for sure until we are entitled to litigate the regulation.
 No, no. We know enough at the summary judgment stage for us to -- to decide whether the case can go forward or the dismissal stage.
 Well, there has been no summary judgment --
 Or dismissal stage.
 At -- at the dismissal stage, our pleadings have to be accepted as true, and we believe that the pleadings sufficiently assert that there are regulations there that create a -- a property interest and that --
 That create a property right?
 Yes.
 But the property right is the contract with the United States. I mean, you can't get away from the contract by calling it a property right.
 We do not believe there is a contract and we do not believe we have to rely on it. We were -- the Does were coerced into what they did. They do not seek compensation.
 What is your strongest case? I don't think Matthews addresses it. What is your strongest case for the notion that you have a property interest even though you don't have a contract?
 Probably Perry v. Sindermann in the sense that there was clear that the contract was over but the Court indicated that --
 Well, that was the firing of a school teacher. There was --
 It was a nonrenewal.
 -- there was -- there was an interest in having your job, contract property, and interest in getting back salary, contract property. Not this case.
 The -- what the Court actually, I believe, focused on there and in Goldberg v. Kelly was the question of whether there were regulations --
 Goldberg v. Kelly, welfare benefits, money.
 We believe this is in a sense the equivalent of a welfare benefit.
 Perry v. Sindermann. Is that -- that's the nontenured teacher?
 Yes.
 There's no property right there, I don't think. I've always taught that as a ground that it wasn't compared to Roth where there was. All right. So -- so -- but there was a First Amendment interest of some kind.
 And I believe the Court indicated that it would be possible if there were practices and policies that had been established that set substantive standards for continuing that there would be a property right in a fair procedure for determining that internally at the school.
 You're probably right if they have -- I see what you're saying.
 We also believe there is a liberty interest. These people came to the U.S. in danger. The mere fact of labeling them essential to the United States and bringing them in in the PL-110 status, taking away their identity, giving them a false identity, false references, changing their occupations, all of those things we believe -- we have an argument -- created a liberty interest in continuation of the protection. It's the special relationship, the Dushane-type argument that the -- that the Ninth Circuit relied on. But I would hasten to add it is premature to determine whether we win on the merits, and the Government is absolutely wrong in their brief in suggesting that unless we can prove at this point that we can win on the merits, that we don't have standing. We have standing to make a claim for fair procedures. Those procedures may include confirming internally to the CIA our identity and they may include confirming whether we satisfy whatever the need-based standard is that the CIA has identified. We have made every possible effort to comply with the covenant that Totten imposed in a contract, a contract that we don't believe we have. We sued as Does. We have sought preapproval of every single filing. We had -- counsel that learned any confidential information were precleared by the agency. That is not what happened in Totten. Those are procedures, as Justice Scalia has suggested, that did not -- were not recognized at the time of Totten just like the due process claim was not recognized at the time of Totten. And it is a claim that can be done internally to the CIA.
 You think that Totten would be decided differently today because of the -- our due process jurisprudence?
 We believe that Totten didn't know to make a claim other than contract.
 I -- that's not my question.
 Yes, we do.
 Suppose Mr. Totten is here today.
 And if there were regulations in the Totten situation that created some sort of meaningful standard that would be applied by an internal procedure, which the record shows here the CIA has an internal procedure, not just regulations setting out the standard, but a review process. We simply want to have a fair, internal procedure. This case really is not about the protection of state secrets, but the limits of the executive authority to unilaterally assert without any review by the court --
 How would the court -- a court go about monitoring this fair procedure --
 We -- we don't believe the court would have a role in monitoring the fair procedure. It would simply determine whether the procedure that the CIA has described in the court record already satisfied minimum standards of -- of due process. If the court found that it did not --
 And then you -- you said that -- suppose you knew what it was on paper and then you wanted to complain to a court, that's not what they gave us. They said that in their regulations, but they gave us something much less.
 It's possible that the CIA would assert that there is some reason that it gave less than its regulations that would be a state secret. It's hard for us to imagine what that would be, but in fact that is open on remand for the -- for the CIA to argue that.
 Do these regulations just set forth a procedure or do they set forth some substantive entitlement?
 They seem to do both. They -- we haven't, of course, seen them in full yet, but they set forth a procedure and then they also say that there is some sort of need, age, indigency, and health-based standard for continuing the support. And if you'll notice --
 Then it will be worse for them. I mean, they say, look, frankly we'd rather reveal the names of one or two spies than we would like to reveal our procedures for dealing with the spies we bring into the United States. It will take someone who reads those about 15 minutes with a computer to locate 400 resettled spies. That will be a terrible disaster.
 If that was an external process, but we agree it should be internal to the CIA, that the process for applying that standard must remain internal to the CIA. The Does share the interest in protecting their identity and the identities of others like them. We -- we believe that the Government --
 What's your answer? What is your response?
 That there's no external -- there -- there will be no public knowledge of that information, that they can explain their -- they can apply their process internally, apply the need-based process internally, and that will not be litigated in the courts if they assert executive -- or state secret privilege as to that, and we assume that they would at that point. But we -- we agree --
 But the court would say you don't have a cause of action unless it knows what -- what these regulations say. Surely the regulations have to be disclosed to the court at least.
 We -- we believe that's the case and they have not yet said that it would hinder the state secrets at all to disclose them, and they have disclosed quite a bit and said that the remainder they are holding back only a need-to-know basis. They have not asserted any state secret privilege with the remaining regulations. And we know, in fact, from the letter that is in the record from -- between the CIA and the Justice Department in which the -- there was basically an understanding that there would be regulations like this in order to make sure that these PL-110 resettlees did not effectively become wards otherwise on -- on the Government and that the CIA would continue some responsibility for them. The -- we are not aware of any case in which this Court has suggested that there is an obligation of the district court to look behind the use of Doe and determine in a public manner the identity of the person. That -- the Government seems to assume that they have some entitlement to have a self-inflicted harm that they would demand that the identity of the Does be disclosed publicly and that they're entitled to do that. We do not believe that that's a required part of the use of Does. And in any event, we think it is somewhat similar to the criminal context where, if the Government is going to insist on moving forward in some way that is an affirmative defense like that, they may well have a responsibility for not being able to defend their position if they, at the same time, say that the state secret privilege applies. But at this point, anyway, that has not been presented to the district court. We -- we find it strange that the Government so quickly now says, unlike what it argued in Webster, that there is this type of contract which is not subject to the jurisdictional bar, and that is a contract with their own employees when they tell us that those same employees are going to know a much broader swath, as Mr. Clement said, of secrets. If their rationale made sense as something that was so compelling that the Court should create a jurisdictional bar for what the courts would otherwise have the capacity and the competence to do, you would think it would apply in that situation as well. But the fact is they lost Webster, and so they have to try to say that there is something still very broad about Totten but explain away Webster, and they simply cannot convincingly do that. Webster was the same argument by them. Reynolds was the same argument by them, and they lost.
 May -- may I ask you what is probably a stupid question? Why isn't the contract barred by the statute of frauds?
 Well, we haven't thought about that because we haven't proceeded on -- on the contract. There may well -- we -- it probably is.
 Yes.
 And there -- we -- we -- but we do not proceed on the contract. The Does, in fact, do not underestimate the risks of disclosure of their identities and of their relationship with the CIA. Perhaps they put too much into the complaint describing at some length what they did, but the reason for that, I suggest, is understandable. It was subject to preapproval by the agency. Why not put the equities in there even though they're not essential elements of your claim and see if the agency approves them? The agency approved them. We should not be thrown out of court because we put into the complaint allegations which the agency admits using the Doe, do not threaten any secrets, and which are not part of the essential elements of our claim.
 Are all of these what you call 110 resettlees -- are they all CIA resettlees?
 It does not appear that they are.
 Some of them State Department and --
 At -- at least -- my understanding is at least the FBI and perhaps the Commissioner of INS at the time for -- perhaps at the request of other agencies. It appears that all three agencies had the ability to create this exception to the normal immigration procedure. If the Does can show on remand that the CIA's regulations are as they allege and that PL-110 status generally, which is what the CIA witness McNair basically said, that many PL-110 resettlees are in continued danger because of the nature of which we brought them in, regardless of what they did before we decided to bring them in, or if they can show that in their particular situation there is a -- a special relationship of danger created, we believe we would have a substantive due process argument and a procedural due process argument. That is not today's question. The Government has agreed that for purposes of today's question, it should be assumed that we can make out a due process claim. That claim is --
 I'm not quite sure where the Government has said that. You talk about footnote 2. All it said was that they're not appealing the point that you have to go to the Court of Claims.
 And also in footnote 1 in the -- in their brief on the merits to this Court. I think it's on page 7. My reading of that is that they are not challenging the due process analysis, and it would be premature to challenge the due process analysis at this time, which is what the Court said in Webster. We believe that our due process argument is stronger than the due process argument that was made in Webster, but the Court in any event said that's not what is -- what is before us at this time. And -- and we believe that that's the same situation now.
 Do you agree --
 I'm just wondering what --
 Excuse me. Do you agree your due process argument does depend on having either a property interest or a liberty interest?
 Yes.
 I'm just wondering what's, you know, some foreign -- I don't know who -- who the Does spied on, but let's assume -- you say they're in danger. Somebody may be interested in -- in the subject. What kind of security provisions do you have in your law office that would -- that would make them immune from the kind of intrusion that foreign espionage services --
 In -- in general, we have not been allowed to take information outside of the agency. Even when we're in the clear --
 I'm not talking about the agency. Just about the name of your clients. I think it's -- there are countries interested in -- in, you know, who was spying on them.
 That was their decision to trust us with that, and ironically under the Government's theory of this case, the Does --
 Well, but it may lead -- it may lead to other agents and -- and one of the problems about allowing suits like this is that this information about who the agents are will be brought to a lawyer, kept in his law office, and much more readily accessible to -- to foreign powers than -- than it would be at Langley.
 And under the agency's theory of this case, there is nothing that stops the Does from making their identities public because there is no enforceable contract that the agency can enforce. The agency wants to keep Snepp. It wants to live with Webster, and the only thing it has left is to somehow carve out a rule that applies to these people who have done everything they possibly could, including not telling me who they are. Our files within our office do not identify them in writing, is my understanding, by name. I certainly am not aware of who they are. I know what's alleged in the complaint and nothing more than that. But certainly the risk of gray mail, the risk of the Does -- people in the Does' position disclosing something is totally irrelevant to the question of whether Totten creates some sort of bar that applies not just to a contract claim but to a claim where there is no contract, where it is not alleged that it is based upon a contract, and where the parties have done everything possible -- the Does, the plaintiffs, have done everything possible to honor the confidences that the Government wants to keep. Thank you, Your Honors.
 Thank you, Mr. Burman. Mr. Clement, you have about 4 and a half minutes if you need them.
 Justice Stevens, just a few points. And may it please the Court, just a few points in rebuttal. First of all, as I think Justice Kennedy's question indicated, there was no waiver of any due process argument. If you look at those footnotes, the only thing that's waived is the Tucker Act concern that we talked about earlier. Second of all, I think in thinking about this PL-110 claim, it's important to acknowledge, as I think Justice Scalia was suggesting, that it is the PL-110 claim to the CIA. And as I understand their argument, it depends on their being a significant difference between coming into court and saying I'm an unacknowledged spy and I'd like to sue the CIA and coming into court and saying I am an unacknowledged PL-110 resettlee with a claim against the CIA, please hear my claim. I would say there's no material difference in terms of all of the policies that undergird the Totten doctrine between those two. And I would note that even the Ninth Circuit recognized at 35a and 37a of the petition appendix that the respondents would have to establish a relationship with the agency. The final two points I would make is, first of all, they would like to make some benefit of the fact that they are suing as Does as opposed to the Totten case. I would make two points about that. First of all, presumably the reason that William Lloyd could use his name in the Totten case is because it was a suit by his estate and he was deceased, so he didn't have a concern about retaliation. (Laughter.)
 I would also say that the difference between suing under Doe and suing under your name just makes clear that both sides to this litigation start with the premise that the fundamental fact of this litigation turns on a secret. They don't want their name revealed any more than we want the name revealed, and that just underscores how this is all about a secret, just as in Totten. The last point I would make is they asked you to take their pleadings as a given at this stage in the litigation, and I would ask you to look at those pleadings. The complaint is replete with references to the espionage relationship, and the complaint itself cites Totten or the Totten doctrine no less than seven times. I would suggest that if this claim is not Totten-barred, then no claim is. With that, I'd ask the court below be reversed.
 Thank you. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument in the case of Rousey against Jacoway. Ms. Karlan.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Yesterday in Koons Buick against Nigh, this Court emphasized once again that statutory interpretation is a holistic process based on common sense, that the reading of the statute should look at all the words to avoid a passing strange or an anomalous result when the text does not dictate it and the statutory history suggests otherwise.
 That was a case I dissented in, wasn't it?
 Yes, but actually, Justice Scalia, I think even you will find our case more appealing.
 Yes, but -- but it is true you have a strong textual --
 We have an excellent textual argument.
 I was a little bit surprised at your opening because it seems to me you have a strong textual argument you're now defending.
 We do. A holistic reading of the text shows that section 522(d)(10)(e) of the Bankruptcy Code --
 What does a holistic reading mean? Can you stay within the --
 Absolutely.
 -- text and still be holistic?
 I'm not going to look outside the text at all. A holistic reading of section 522(d)(10)(e) of the Bankruptcy Code, which is on -- in the petitioners' brief at pages 1 through 2 --
 What does the word holistic mean? (Laughter.)
 I think it means read all the words in the sense that makes the most sense to you rather than plucking words at random or rather than looking at a word artificially. For example, when you look at a phrase like on account of in the Bankruptcy Code, as the Court did in North LaSalle, account means a lot of different things, but there it clearly meant because of, as it does in this statute.
 So the antonym would be parsimonious or something like that?
 I think it'd be partial, but I'm not sure.
 Well, let -- let me ask --
 Sure.
 -- ask you this. The -- the statute does say that the right to receive a payment is on account of age, and that seems to me to be an argument somewhat in respondent's favor because the -- the payment has to be triggered by the age, if you read it that way, and it seems to me that's a fair way to read it.
 Yes, and I think payments are triggered by age because section 522(d)(10)(e) is a statute eminently about the protection in bankruptcy of retirement payments. For individuals --
 Well, the problem for the court below was that the person covered can ask for it in a lump sum and pay a penalty.
 Right, and that's not --
 And -- and that isn't then on the basis of age. Am I right? Is that -- that was the problem the court had below.
 Yes, that's the problem the court had below. I think it's an illusory problem for the following reason. It's clear that the right to receive full enjoyment of payments under an IRA does not attach until one of the triggering events occurs. The trigger events are age 59 and a half, disability, illness, or for the estate, death. And that's the right that we're talking about here, and that's why --
 Well, when you say full enjoyment, you -- you think when -- when I'm taxed on something, I -- I don't have full enjoyment of it? The only thing triggered by age, as far as I can tell -- the only thing triggered by age -- is your obtaining of a tax benefit. That's all. Once you reach a certain age, you can withdraw it without -- without paying the 10 percent tax.
 That's correct, but the 10 percent tax here is designed and does, in fact, operate as a deterrent and a penalty.
 Well, I'm sure it does, but -- but it's -- it's hard to accept the notion that simply because after a certain age I get a tax benefit, I'm receiving the money on account of my age. That doesn't make any sense to me.
 Well, Justice Scalia, the way that I would view that is prior to age 59 and a half, you pay a penalty. And Congress put that penalty in there because the holistic sense, the full reading of section 522(d)(10)(e) is it is designed to protect retirement savings, replacement income of the elderly, the disabled, or ill people, once they get to the point where those triggering events, which are in 522(d)(10)(e), occur. Those are the same triggering events --
 Ms. Karlan, the -- as long as this money was in the plan, it was shielded from bankruptcy, and there are -- there was not unlimited access even with the penalty when it was in the plan. One thing that I don't know and may be of some significance, did the Rouseys have a chance, even though they lost their employment, to keep their money in the plan where it would be shielded from bankruptcy or did they have to roll it over?
 Northrop Grumman's policy is to require individuals who leave the company's employment to roll their pension plans into an IRA. The Rouseys tried to get work in Arkansas when they moved there. Had they gotten a job there that they were able to keep, which they were unable to do because of their health, they could have rolled that money back into an undeniably, completely exemptible.
 Another employer's plan.
 That's correct.
 But they could not have kept it in this employer's plan?
 No. This employer did not permit individuals to keep the money in the plan. They were told they had to remove the money when they lost their jobs.
 That was a term of the plan that it -- you can remain in it only so long as you're employed?
 Apparently so.
 Are there any other plans that are -- are entities clearly covered by the statute in which the only effect of age is to enable you to avoid a tax?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 All right. Well, then --
 Let me give you a couple --
 -- then you might persuade me.
 Let me give you a couple of examples --
 Okay.
 -- that I think will be quite familiar. A 401(k) plan allows you to get access to money before you turn 59 and a half on account of hardship, and you pay a 10 percent tax penalty if you do so. The Federal Government's thrift savings plan for Federal employees allows you to take a loan out of the plan and to pay the interest back into your own account before you turn 59 and a half, thereby essentially giving you free use of the money. If you don't pay the loan back, it's then treated as a -- as a distribution, and you pay the 10 percent tax penalty on it. So that if you read this statute to -- not to include IRA's, to deny exemption to IRA's, you read this statute to deny exemption to virtually all of the modern forms of defined contribution pension plans or savings plans.
 Yes. That was what I was going -- aren't most of the pension profit-sharing, stock bonus plans, and annuities similar to the IRA's in terms of allowing withdrawal on the payment of a penalty?
 Absolutely, Your Honor.
 I thought they were all in the same boat. So what the effect of this rule is -- of the Ninth Circuit is that they would all fail to qualify --
 Yes, that's correct. You would render section 522(d)(10)(e) essentially a nullity.
 Oh, it's the Eighth Circuit. Excuse me.
 Yes. I -- I can see why you might have thought it was the Ninth Circuit. (Laughter.)
 It -- it might be wrong anyway. (Laughter.)
 Yes, yes.
 What is the percentage amount of the payments that are taken out of all IRA plans before people are 59 and a half?
 Well, in the Cilek case from the Seventh Circuit, which is cited in our brief, the court there cited statistics that suggested it was between 1.2 and 1.7 percent of funds in IRA's were removed early under the penalty process.
 And the -- the payment here -- it says -- the statute uses the word payment. So suppose you simply have an IRA plan but you don't take money out of it. Then is it exempt from bankruptcy?
 It would be because it's the right to the future payments and not just the present payments, Justice Breyer.
 So -- so -- but I'm trying -- what I'm trying to figure out is if a person were to take -- just reading it in English, it sounds as if a person were to take the plan out before he's 59 and a half and pay the penalty, that that amount that he took out would not be a -- a payment because of age, but one that he took out after he's 59 and a half and didn't pay the penalty would be.
 That's correct, Justice Breyer. But in order to protect the ability to take money out after someone turns 59, you have to protect the corpus of the IRA now because otherwise, when he turns 59 and a half, there won't be any money there for him to take out. And that's why the exemption extends not just to present payments, as the Third Circuit erroneously held, but also to the corpus when it is necessary for the support of the debtor. And I can't emphasize --
 Ms. Karlan, let me ask something about that very point because the statute says that to the extent reasonably necessary for the support of the debtor it's allowable.
 Yes, Justice O'Connor.
 Are you aware of cases where the bankruptcy court has said, well, you don't need all that money? That's a big plan. You don't need all that. We'll just let you deduct X amount.
 Absolutely, Justice O'Connor. We cite a number of them in both the opening brief and in the yellow brief on pages 19 through -- to 20, I think is where we -- where we talk about --
 Can we take this concrete case? Hers was something over $12,000; his, something over $42,000.
 Yes.
 What was the claim here as to -- was part or all of that -- it would be some $54,000.
 The claim was all that all of that was necessary. If I could give an example that I think Justice O'Connor might find instructive here. When a debtor, for example, is 40 years old, they generally require turnover of the entire IRA because people have time to earn the money back again. When the debtor has other retirement savings, for example, in a case from Virginia called Abate, because the person also had a 401(k) plan, they were required to turn over the entire IRA. When a debtor is able to work, even if the debtor is in his or her 50's, courts will often require exclusion of at -- will also require turnover of at least part of the IRA. In this case --
 What -- what do the courts do if they say, well, my client might be ill or something like that? It seems to me --
 Well, if the client is ill now, they get to keep it --
 No, no. They -- they say my client is able-bodied now, but we -- we need something because -- I don't know -- there's a history of family illness or something.
 There isn't a reported case that talks about the possibility of future illness as a reason of exempting the money.
 It's -- I'm trying to figure out how -- how -- what the theory is. Is -- you say I have a right to receive payments because of age. And you say, well, here I have a body of money and 99 percent comes out of it after you're 60. 1 percent comes out before. So it's very tempting to say that that corpus there, of course, is a body of money that you're going to have a right to receive because of age because the practical effect of the 10 percent is -- is -- stops the -- the younger person getting the money. So does the case then turn on that? I mean, suppose -- suppose it were a 3 percent penalty and 40 percent of the people took out the money before they were 60 or a 1 percent penalty and 80 percent did it. Then should I reach the other result? I'm just trying to think of how does this analysis work. What's the right analysis?
 I would say at the 1 percent and 80 percent of the people are taking the money out, it wouldn't operate really as a retirement plan anymore. But if I can give another statistic that might be helpful in thinking about this. 18 percent of the participants in large 401(k) plans who are under the age of 50 are taking loans out against those plans today.
 What percent?
 18 percent in one of the surveys. And yet, those plans are undeniably, absolutely exempt under the bankruptcy --
 Well, they're taking out loans against it. They're -- they're not withdrawing the money.
 Well, but the loans because -- for example, in the Federal thrift savings plan, the interest is being paid back into your own account, it's essentially as close to taking out the money as you can get.
 I still don't have your answer to the problem that bothered me at the first. How -- how do you reconcile your positions with on account of language? If the -- if your clients can take the money -- just take the money out of the IRA at any time, then why is it on account of age?
 It -- it's not the -- if you look at the statute -- and let me just work my way through it with you. It's the right to a payment under a stock bonus, profit-sharing, annuity, or similar plan on account of illness. And the question is what does on account of modify there. I think the most natural and sensible reading of the statute is a plan that is because of age, a plan that is because of disability, and the like.
 So you say that payment doesn't -- on account of doesn't modify payment.
 I don't -- I don't think you need to read it that way, and I think the most sensible reading here, especially given that the statute --
 Well, I -- I think the logical reading is that it -- it modifies payment.
 Well, I -- I'm not sure that it does, but even if it did, Your Honor --
 Holistic for me. What -- what does it -- what does it modify? I mean, if you had to diagram it, on account of goes to what noun?
 Well, this is again -- I know you dissented yesterday, but this is a less than meticulously crafted statute.
 No. I thought I was being holistic yesterday, to tell you the truth. (Laughter.)
 Okay. Okay.
 But --
 Well --
 -- but what does on account of modify?
 I think what on account of modifies here is the kind of plan out of which the payment is coming.
 Where -- where is that noun?
 There are a variety of plans, stock bonus, pension --
 The right to receive a payment under a stock bonus, pension --
 Yes.
 -- profit sharing, annuity, or similar plan or -- or contract. It's a plan on account of illness, an annuity?
 Plans --
 Why -- why isn't it a right on account of?
 It's the right on account of.
 Well, I think you can read it either way and you'll get to exactly the same result. So let me read it the way that you've been reading it, which is if you want to protect the ability of people who have IRA's to withdraw money on account of age, you have to protect the IRA now or there will be no money in it for them to exercise their right to withdraw on account of age.
 Yes, but -- but there still is a right to take payments at any time.
 Justice -- Justice Kennedy, we don't believe --
 So -- so then you're -- you're --
 -- that that's actually a right.
 Under that, you're giving the -- the language that follows it no meaning.
 No, Justice Kennedy, I don't think that's what I'm doing here, and the reason I don't think that's what I'm doing is because this statute clearly refers to IRA's by name as one of the plans that's entitled to exemption.
 But as purely English -- as purely English, I read it as saying it's a right. What is that right? The right is a right to receive a payment on account of age. That's the -- a plan. That's the right. Now, your argument, I take it, was -- is that yes, it's true you also have a right under certain conditions to take it without respect to age. So what we have here is a plan that gives you both kind of rights.
 That's correct.
 It's a kind that gives you a right to take it with a penalty and a right to take it because of age without a penalty. And thus, the question is, is that kind of plan which gives you both kind of rights covered? And the language doesn't answer it. So --
 But under Justice Breyer's hypothetical, that's just like a savings account.
 Yes.
 No.
 No, because the savings account doesn't have -- I mean, the savings account doesn't have the -- the penalty. Isn't your argument that you've got to read the right as meaning a right without penalty, because if you don't read it that way, then every one of these other retirement instruments is likewise going to fail? Isn't that your -- your strong point?
 That's your strong point.
 That's correct. That's -- that's our strong point and we're sticking with it. (Laughter.)
 Right. Right -- it's not a right if you have to pay a penalty for it.
 That's correct. It's not a right, as we say in the reply brief, to park on the sidewalk because if you pay the parking ticket, you can park there.
 Right.
 And I think no matter how --
 That's a good argument. I like that.
 Thank you. (Laughter.)
 No matter how you read the statute, it's designed to cover IRA's, and any reading of the statute that ends up not covering IRA's will also not cover many of the other --
 Why didn't Congress just put in IRA's along with the other things?
 They did, Justice Ginsburg. They did in the last line of the statute.
 Yes, but that's sort of an oblique way to get it there. I mean, why didn't they put it together with the other string of plans?
 Well, my best guess as to why they didn't do that is they started drafting the exemptions statute in 1973 and they enacted IRA's in 1974, so they stuck it in at the end of the list. That's my best guess.
 What --
 What your -- what your opponents say is that the -- the thing at the end doesn't prove anything because they're willing to acknowledge that some IRA's can be so structured that you cannot withdraw until -- until you reach a certain age. And if they're structured that way, they would be covered. So you had to mention 408 in the -- in the exceptions. What's wrong with that argument?
 Well, what's wrong with that, Justice Scalia, is that all IRA's are designed and they're administered on forms that the Internal Revenue Service sets out and you buy the forms to allow for early withdrawal. So under their theory, there has -- there is not now and there has never been a single IRA anywhere in the United States --
 Well --
 -- that had that inability to take the money out subject to penalty prior to the age 59 and a half.
 Do -- do we know that? I mean, couldn't someone -- I -- I don't think this is a very plausible basis for construing the statute, but just as a technical matter, couldn't someone go to the bank or brokerage firm and say I want to set up an IRA, but I want the IRA to be, in -- in effect, like an irrevocable trust in which withdrawals can only be made on certain, specific conditions? And couldn't someone, using both the IRA mechanism and a State irrevocable trust document, create an IRA that would be as restricted as -- as the circuit suggested it might be?
 I don't necessarily think so for the following reason. IRA's are off-the-rack products. They're a basic consumer product that 40 million people buy. People don't usually negotiate the terms. If you did negotiate the terms, though, here's the second problem. Anytime you deviate from the form that the Internal Revenue Service gives you, which also gives you these rights to withdraw early subject to penalty, you run the risk that your plan will then be held to be a nonqualifying plan under section 408 of the tax code. You then lose the ability to deduct the contributions going in. You then lose the ability to defer the payments on the income as it accrues in the account. Now, to answer the last part of your question, one of the things that has occurred over the last, say, 5 to 10 years is more and more States are passing laws that essentially protect IRA's in bankruptcy and out, as a matter of State law, from any attachment by creditors. Why do they do that? Because they recognize that IRA's are a fundamental piece of the retirement system today.
 And some don't. And the -- and the State systems vary.
 That's correct, but only four States offer no protection to IRA's from creditors as opposed to --
 As opposed to how many who do?
 46 States offer some kind of protection. 23 States protect them without limit in bankruptcy and out. 6 of them protect them inside of bankruptcy using the State exemptions as long as the amount is reasonable and necessary for the debtor's support.
 Well, that's what -- with the purpose that we're talking about now --
 That's correct.
 -- if it's only 6 that, faced with a bankruptcy, would shelter the IRA.
 No. No. 23 of them would protect all IRA's. 6 would protect all IRA's if the money in them is necessary to the debtor's support, an additional 6. 6 more would protect all the money in an IRA as long as it was deposited 120 days or a year or 3 years before the debtor filed for bankruptcy. 3 of them will protect all IRA's up to a dollar amount. In Nevada, the dollar amount is $500,000. 8 States use, as their State exemption law, an IRA that -- a statute that has exactly the same language as the Federal statute. 6 of those State statutes have been interpreted by Federal courts to protect IRA's.
 But here there was no choice of picking up on the State?
 There's a -- there's a weird anomaly in Arkansas, Your Honor, which is Arkansas law does, in fact, protect IRA's, but the Federal bankruptcy courts in Arkansas have interpreted that law only to protect the IRA up to $500 because of a provision in the Arkansas constitution, article 9, section 2, that means that you can only save up to $500. So any bankrupt person in Arkansas who wants to keep any money in his -- in his IRA has to elect the Federal exemptions rather than electing the State exemptions.
 And one train that we didn't finish before. You were explaining that in this case the entire $55,000 -- that entire sum would be needed -- would be necessary for the support of the debtors.
 That's correct. The bankruptcy court did not rule on our claim that it was all reasonably necessary because they decided first that IRA's didn't come within the meaning of section 522.
 But you -- that was your claim, and I --
 Yes, Your Honor.
 How did you come to that conclusion, that the entire amount?
 Well, if you take, say, $55,000 and you ask what sort of annuity could you purchase when you hit age 59 and a half with that money, it will be an annuity that, I would guess -- you know, I -- I hate to do math in my head like this. I'd guess it would throw off a couple of hundred dollars a month in additional income. And so if you ask will the Rouseys need that money for their support, I think the answer is yes because their only other support --
 Well. Oh, yes.
 -- is Social Security and a $2,000 a month defined benefit plan that will never go up and against which their Social Security will be offset. So when they start becoming eligible, as Mr. Rousey is about to be, for Social Security, that defined benefit plan reduces their benefits. So if the Rouseys are to have an old age in which they can afford to live in any kind of reasonable circumstance at all, they need this money.
 May I go back and just nail down one lose end in -- in an answer that you -- you gave to my question, can you set up a kind of irrevocable? I assume clearly from what you say is that there is not only no statute, but no IRS reg or ruling to the effect that you can make your IRA terms more restrictive without jeopardizing your qualification.
 I was unable to find one, Your Honor.
 Okay.
 I'd like to reserve the remainder of my time.
 Why didn't the Government come in here, just as a matter of curiosity? We don't have an amicus brief here from the Government, do we?
 I -- no, we do not have one, and I don't --
 The Government has no position on the matter.
 Well, I -- I don't think they've taken a position here. I will say that in Patterson against Shumate, they referred to IRA's in a footnote in their brief, I believe, as pension plans under section 408.
 There -- they never go bankrupt, so the position they usually take is against any exemption from the -- (Laughter.)
 Well -- well, that's correct. The United States trustee may have wanted them to -- I'd like to reserve the remainder of my time.
 Ms. McKiever.
 Justice Stevens, may it please the Court: Pursuant to section 522(d)(10)(e) of the Bankruptcy Code, a debtor's right to receive a payment is not exempt unless two requirements are met. First, the right to receive the payment must be on account of illness, disability, death, age or length of service, and the right must come from a specified similar plan or contract. Because neither of those elements is satisfied in this case, the petitioners' IRA's are not exempt.
 Is it -- is it the case that other plans that are clearly covered by the text of this statute also permit early withdrawal for certain reasons?
 Yes and no, and let me explain that. Yes, they do permit withdrawals based upon certain factors. Those are enumerated based -- based upon each individual plan. However, they do not permit withdrawals for any reason at any time for any purpose.
 Not a single one of them.
 Not a single one of them. Now, of course, I've not read every plan ever created, but none of the plans that I have ever seen, as the specified plans, the pension plans, the profit-sharing plans, any of those, allow withdrawal for any reason at any time.
 And you'd say that if one of them did, it would also not be covered.
 That's correct. It -- it is thought --
 What -- what --
 I take it -- in -- in answering Justice Scalia, I take it from what you didn't say that none of the -- we'll call them kind of the paradigm example plans are, however, as -- as restricted as the language in this -- this statute would suggest that it had to be if you read it in a -- in a very literal way.
 There are --
 In other words, they're all a little bit sinful, at least, even if they're not as sinful as -- as you say the -- the 401 -- the -- the IRA is.
 That -- that is correct. The -- there probably are plans out there -- once again, there are so many plans. And those are created by financial institutions, by employers, by different entities. So therefore there are thousands of variations of those.
 Now, why? Okay. Once you're down that road, you have conceded, as you must, that a plan that says you get the money because of age but you also can get the money without respect to age in certain circumstances can be a plan covered by the act. Now, that's the kind of a plan that's right in front of you. So, therefore, literally it falls just as much within the language as the other that you want to say even though that is literally true, this plan is very different from the others in terms of the purposes of the act. That's what I would like to hear because to me, I'm not so moved by holistic as I am by purposes, which is part of holistic. So -- so the -- the point that I would like to know is why, since ordinary people think of IRA's as pensions -- I do. I think of it that way. I don't know much about it. It's designed to help in the future, help when you're old and sick. But there is this extra thing in it which you point to. So why, in terms of purposes is this different from the others?
 This is different because this is the only kind of plan where you can access the funds at any time for any purpose. It is also --
 I know that, but -- but -- and you do it with a penalty. We agree about the facts.
 That's correct.
 But I want to know why that difference makes a difference in a world where only 1 or less 2 percent of the people do access it before they're 60, 59 and a half.
 Because the right to -- to receive the payment, the right to access the money at any time exists no matter if it is exercised or not, and it does not meet the language of the statute. The statute very specifically --
 No, no. I -- you've missed my point and I'm sorry. I put you on the wrong track with my following up. I shouldn't have.
 I'm sorry. Yes.
 My question is we all agree that there can be plans where you can get the money not having to do with age, and they fall within the language of the act, and indeed, you say some are covered. But this one you say is worse than the others in terms of the purposes of the act, and that's what I want to hear why.
 Because there is no causal connection between any of the factors that are enumerated in the statute and the right to receive the money. And that is --
 I --
 May I ask this question? Supposing instead of a 10 percent penalty, there was an absolute prohibition, would you agree -- on getting the money before you're 59 and a half, would then that qualify?
 Absolutely, yes, it would.
 Now, what if there were a 50 percent penalty?
 Clearly, there's a point at which it would qualify as a prohibition more than just --
 And what is it that makes it a prohibition? Is it -- is it because the purpose is to deter withdrawals, or it is that it becomes economically unacceptable? What -- what is the reason for drawing the line somewhere above 10 percent?
 The reason for drawing the line is because at 10 percent, as the Eighth Circuit has stated in -- in the Huebner case, it -- it said that it's a minimal penalty. However, there is still the unfettered access that's available.
 But what is the purpose of imposing any penalty at all?
 I would assume as a disincentive to -- to withdraw, but it's clearly not a prohibition, such as the -- the parking --
 But 50 percent would not be a prohibition and neither would 90 percent.
 It would not be a prohibition, but it would operate more as a prohibition than 10 percent.
 So it's a matter of degree rather than a difference in kind.
 Clearly that -- it's a very difficult line to draw. I -- I can't make that call at this moment, but --
 It seems to me the easiest black letter rule is no tax or some tax. I mean, if it was totally free like an ordinary bank account, then you'd be dead right. But the fact that for a -- an important purpose there is a 10 percent penalty put in seems to me puts it into the category of things that are -- you're not supposed to have an absolute right to get.
 But the -- the hallmark difference here is that it -- it is the only type of account that you can access paying the penalty for any reason --
 I assume --
 -- regardless of the specified reason.
 -- that -- that your answer to Justice Breyer as to why that makes a difference with regard to the purpose of the statute is that the purpose of the statute is to make sure that people have money for their retirement, and that if you can withdraw it for any reason whatever, there is no security that that money will be there for their retirement; whereas if you limit the reasons to sickness and -- and a certain other number of emergency reasons, the chances the money will be there for the retirement are much higher.
 Well, that -- that's --
 Isn't that the answer?
 But if that's the answer, excellent. So now we have -- (Laughter.)
 -- let's say --
 Thank you, Justice Scalia.
 Let's try -- let's try a million percent tax and nobody in history has ever withdrawn the money. Now, would -- that you would say would fall within this.
 Yes.
 Fine, yes.
 Yes.
 Okay. Now, if that would fall within this, going back to Justice Stevens, because that operates as a bar to prevent the bad world that Justice Scalia mentioned, why doesn't a tax that operates as a bar that's good enough to stop 98.5 percent of the people from withdrawing their money and having nothing left for old age -- why isn't that just as good as the million percent tax in a world that is imperfect?
 Because clearly the -- the access of money and the ability to use it prior to retirement, just as -- as Justice Scalia just stated, that allows the -- the debtors to -- to access freely for any purpose, clearly not showing that -- that it would be for retirement purposes.
 But attachment of the --
 All right, but it's acquired. Say -- say retirement, not old age. I mean, you know, 60 -- it's not that bad -- (Laughter.)
 93.
 If -- if that is going to be your criterion, the -- the total freedom for any purpose, then why, if we accept your argument, why -- why don't we face sort of a daunting run or the courts face sort of daunting future? Because the -- the question then is going to be, well, what purposes are sufficiently close to old age to -- to allow for a continued exemption and how free may the purposes be before a plan falls into the IRA category. You told us a few moments ago -- and I'm sure you -- you were right -- that the kind of the paradigm example plans vary enormously depending on the terms in which employers set them up. So if -- if we say that the -- the dividing line is going to be between plans under which withdrawal can be for any purpose versus plans in which withdrawal is going to be somehow limited, then we're going to have to litigate an awful lot of plans. Aren't we?
 Not necessarily. The -- the line that we're really looking to is that there has to be a direct causation factor between one of the five specified factors such as on -- on account of factors, age, disability, death, length of service, and the right to receive the payment.
 Well, but typically these plans like 401(k) plans permit hardship withdrawals, and other plans that are mentioned in the act allow withdrawals for medical reasons or to buy housing or something like that. I mean, you -- we would just have endless cases trying to figure out what qualifies and what doesn't. It seems like such a hard line for you to try to draw here.
 Well --
 And every plan that I know of allows withdrawal if you terminate employment.
 And that's typically --
 In fact, that's what happened to these people. So I just don't see how your argument is going to --
 Well, the -- the ability to access the funds, oftentimes with termination, has to do with the length of service, the years in service because they accumulate and oftentimes are not payable at the full percentage. They're not fully vested until that time. Also, with the -- when there are multiple factors existing in the right to receive the payments, each multiple factor can be a cause of the -- of the ability to reach the money. When there are no meaningful factors imposed, though --
 Isn't it simpler to just recognize that these plans are covered despite the right to withdraw and then rely on the provision in the statute that only permits the deduction to the extent reasonably necessary for the support? I mean, that -- that seems to me a fall-back position that's provided for in the statute.
 I understand that -- that may appear to be correct, but the problem with that is that as -- taxpayer status is not the hallmark in this case of if it is or is not exempt. Therefore, all types of accounts, whether they are truly retirement accounts or -- or if they're just savings accounts, could potentially qualify under this statute. If -- if you want to open it up and -- and allow all kinds of accounts to be exemptible under 522(d)(10)(e), the problem is that there is no limit on what can be potentially exempt under that statute.
 No. Well, obviously, it's -- it's governed by the statutory provision that it has to be a stock bonus, pension, profit-sharing, annuity, or similar plan or contract on account of, and so on.
 That's correct.
 And it includes IRA's apparently because of the last provision in the statute referring back to individual retirement acts under section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code.
 The section 408 reference is -- does not in any way expand the exemption. In fact, it is a further condition to place on the -- the exemption. First of all, section 408 sets out only the minimum requirements for an IRA to qualify as a -- as a tax-favored plan. That --
 Ms. -- Ms. Karlan says she doesn't know of any -- of any IRA that did place a -- a restriction which would bring it within that exemption even though the ordinary IRA wouldn't be within the exemption. Do you know of any IRA, a single IRA that -- that has a provision in it restricting withdrawal?
 Absolutely. Those are customizable plans. Any person can go into --
 They can, but do -- do you know that there's -- there's one out there? I don't know --
 I -- I do know of several out there.
 You didn't just draw one up for this case, did you? (Laughter.)
 I did not create one for this case. No, I did not. But they -- they definitely exist. In fact, in the Andersen case out of the Eighth Circuit Bankruptcy Appellate Panel, the debtor had an annuity and prior to the filing of the bankruptcy petition, she elected that she would only receive periodic payments based upon her age, and that was found to be exempt by the Bankruptcy Appellate Panel because that qualified. The payments were based upon her age, and it was then a similar plan because she could not access the funds at any time but only for the specified reason such as age.
 Was that -- was that an IRA that she had? It was an IRA?
 My understanding is, yes, it was under section 408(b) was -- that's my understanding based upon that case.
 Let me -- let me ask you. Maybe this is irrelevant, but were -- were these restrictive IRA's that you're aware of set up under those terms in contemplation of bankruptcy? If the answer is no, why would anyone so restrict his -- his IRA?
 I -- I do not know if that one specifically was, but no. These have not been set up through --
 But why -- why would anyone do that? They're -- they're qualified without these restrictions. Why would anyone want to cut off his -- his rights to -- to withdraw?
 Clearly to protect the money potentially for retirement and -- and just as --
 In other words, like setting up a personal spendthrift trust?
 That's --
 I -- I want to make it tough so that I -- I will not be tempted to withdraw. Is that the motivation?
 Well, that would potentially be a motivation because clearly the money is there readily accessible at any time to -- to buy anything that the debtor chooses throughout their life. So someone who's 30 or 40 years old can liquidate their -- their IRA account, whereas with a pension or profit-sharing plan, they don't have that kind of access --
 Should we put any weight on the title, on the name? I mean, I -- I can't but thinking it's an individual retirement account. Was Congress trying to fool people? (Laughter.)
 Was the Federal Trade Commission? Should they investigate? What -- I mean, the -- the -- I think of it as an account that's basically aimed, at least Congress thought it was aimed, at retirement, which has usually to do with age.
 Well, the -- the name is clearly not determinative. Also, Congress in the -- in the --
 I'm reading the statute and if I were voting on it and put in the 408 reference and think of the word individual retirement account, is there any -- I would have thought, knowing not that much about it, that of course, they'd be included. Now, is there any indication, when people passed this, that they didn't think they would be? Any -- any reference in the terrible words, legislative history, that might shed light on it?
 Yes. First of all, Congress did historically reject, first of all, just tax-favored status overall, such as what an IRA account is. An IRA account is set up just for tax-favored status. Congress set forth, instead, the (d)(10)(e) -- 522(d)(10)(e) requirements that -- that are much more stringent in the requirements of the traditional IRA.
 Well, are they? Because there was one statement -- I think it was in Ms. Karlan's brief -- that the Fifth Circuit said profit-sharing plans permit participants to withdraw up to the entire amount on payment of the penalty. So a profit-sharing plan, which was one of the ones on the list, seems to be substantially identical if you can also take out, whenever you like, as long as you're willing to pay the penalty.
 That's a misnomer that that's a -- a right to payment. That is rather the right to borrow as a loan. And a loan is very different than a right to payment. They have the right to borrow the funds. However -- for example, in the New York Police Department pension plan, which she referenced in the reply brief, the police officers can borrow up to 90 percent of their pension plan funds. However, they -- as long as they're employed there, they have to continue to repay that.
 What -- what if they don't repay it? What's the sanction?
 There is a 10 percent penalty. However, as the bankruptcy --
 But what -- where -- where would the -- where would the principal repayment come from? I assume it would come from deducting whatever the balance was from the -- the person's account.
 That would be correct.
 I mean, we call it -- the -- the loan feature then boils down to a -- a withdrawal subject to a periodic repayment obligation, but if that obligation is not satisfied, the bottom line will be exactly like a withdrawal because they will simply deduct whatever the balance is from the person's rights under the plan.
 Plus 10 percent you say.
 That's correct. However --
 So it's just -- just like an IRA.
 But -- but this is in the bankruptcy context, which makes it completely different. The bankruptcy filing of a chapter VII bankruptcy is a picture in time. At the time that the debtor files the bankruptcy petition, you look to the assets that the debtor has possession of and the interest that the debtor has at that moment. There's also, for some things, a 1-year look-back period. But because it's a picture in time, it's what the -- the debtor can reach is what the -- the bankruptcy trustee looks to, the types of assets that -- that the debtor owns. This is very different than the pension plan which, of course, the debtor could not have -- have exhausted to pay the creditors prior to filing the bankruptcy, but any other type of account would be there, would be present at the retirement. But because they could have liquidated their IRA's to pay off their creditors prior to filing the bankruptcy, the bankruptcy trustee steps into the shoes of that debtor and has the ability to reach the funds that the debtor can potentially reach. There are other exemptions, of course, set forth in -- in section 522(d), you know, for a home or jewelry, but the assets that are not exempt are readily available to repay creditors, for -- for the benefit of the creditors. Therefore, that -- that makes it significantly --
 Subject to the 10 percent if the bankruptcy trustee does that?
 That's correct. That's correct.
 The -- the penalty still has to be paid even if it's the trustee who takes money out to pay the creditors, on your view.
 That's correct. Yes, they do. They do. Additionally, the petitioners' IRA's are -- by allowing unfettered access, are unlike any of the other plans because the petitioners' standard IRA is much more like a savings account. It's not any form of deferred compensation. They can't look to that to fill a salary void after they retire because the money may not be there. Unlike in the pension plans or a profit-sharing plan, they could have liquidated those funds prior to their reaching any age or any illness that -- that may befall them.
 But there -- there is no penalty attached to withdrawing from a savings account, and there's also no limit on the annual contribution.
 That's correct. That is correct. That is correct. But the -- the key here --
 Let me just get -- get straight what -- what the -- what the universe of plans we have in front of us here. Do you assert that there are no other plans, clearly covered by this statute, that permit withdrawal for any reason but with a penalty?
 That's correct. None of the specified plans listed, the -- the ones enumerated.
 Would permit withdrawal for any reason whatever provided that a penalty is paid.
 That's correct.
 None of them is like that.
 None of them is like that. They all have specific factors. There has to be a causal connection between the ability to access the money. Additionally, it's very important that -- that an account or plan that qualifies under the statute -- it has to be determined on a case-by-case basis. And there's no question that there are definitely IRA's that -- that could and do qualify for this exemption. It is, instead, that --
 Do -- do you disagree with Ms. Karlan that this is -- this is a standardized product so the people, the Rouseys of this world, really couldn't get a tailor-made IRA? They would have to take the standard product.
 That's not -- that's not correct. There are many customizable products that are -- are out there. In fact, for example, when employers set up different kinds of plans for their employees, they go and they can choose from many different options. For example, they can choose if they even have a -- a loan provision built into a -- a 401(k) or a pension plan, just like the IRA. They -- they can be customized because section 408 only sets forth the minimum requirements for it to qualify for tax-favored status. That -- that is an Internal Revenue Code section, and it does not in any way prohibit additional factors being placed into the plan. Rather, it allows the -- the individual or the employer because some -- there are two different types of IRA's that can be set up by an employer -- to go and customize those so that they could potentially meet the statutory requirements.
 These -- these other plans that allow you to withdraw for certain reasons but not for any reason -- what happens if you withdraw for any reason?
 That --
 What is the sanction against -- I mean, you just go in. You withdraw the money for -- for a reason that is not allowed by the employer plan. What -- what is the sanction?
 My understanding is that -- is that you cannot access the funds for a reason not allowed by those plans, that that is prohibited. And that -- that is similar to Ms. Andersen's IRA in the Bankruptcy Appellate Panel case. She could no longer reach the funds in the -- she could no longer reach the corpus of the account. The -- the lump sum of money was there for her retirement years. Whereas, in the IRA situation, the money is not protected at any time. There's no prohibition at all whatsoever on withdrawing the funds from the account other than the payment of the penalty. But whether an account or plan qualifies under the statute, it -- it -- you look at the language of the plan on a plan-by-plan basis. The petitioners' argument renders the terms of the statute superfluous because, first of all, it is dissimilar from the enumerated plans, and secondly, it is not on account of any factors that the money can be reached. The right to receive the payment is not based upon any factor other than the -- the account holder wanting to withdraw the funds.
 The right to receive 100 percent is -- is dependent on a factor, isn't it?
 Yes, it is.
 Yes. At least as to the 10 percent that would be penalty, there's no right to get that money unless you have a certain age.
 That's correct. Unless you have -- or another factor such as for education or for a home loan, something like that. There are several different reasons that you can -- you can reach the money and not pay a penalty. However, the penalty is not -- is not the deciding factor. It's their ability to access the funds at any time that -- that makes that a right of payment. It's not a right of payment without a penalty. It's just that the right to payment exists at all times.
 You don't dispute that -- that it's a very small percentage of people who have IRA's, in fact, exercise the right to withdraw, given the penalty.
 That -- that -- that is -- appears to be correct. I don't have those exact statistics, but yes, that -- that appears to be correct, that they have -- that they may not exercise that at -- in great numbers. First of all, going back to the causation factor about the -- the ability of the debtors to withdraw the funds for any reason or no reason, this Court in the 203 North LaSalle case determined that on account of must mean because of, and that -- that is a key point here because if the debtors can reach the funds for any reason, it is not because of any other factor. And in the LaSalle case, this Court found that that reading, the because of reading, absolutely applies to this section of the -- the Bankruptcy Code, that means that the result is that a direct causal connection is required between the right to receive the payment in the on account of requirements. In -- in this case there is no causal connection whatsoever between the right to receive the payments and -- and any of the factors enumerated in the statute.
 The words, on account of, in this -- this statute are sort of unusual, no matter how you construe them, because really the payment is on account of the years of service or it's on account of a lot of things. You may become eligible at a certain time. It would be better if it said a payment for which you became eligible for one of these reasons because the payment isn't really on account of all of these things. You may get the same amount whether you're disabled or not depending on what the terms of the plan are.
 That's correct. There are, of course, always some other factors, such as you have to first deposit the money, you have to become eligible. But once those barriers are passed, then -- then the right to receive the payment has to be at least -- one of the causes must be one of these factors. And it has to be enumerated in the plan. It cannot be for any reason, but must be an enumerated reason in the plan. And the -- with the penalty, only the avoidance of a penalty is based upon the -- the age of the debtor or the -- or any of the factors. It's -- section 522(d)(10)(e) is void of any reference to the tax status or to the right to receive the payment without penalty. It's only the right to receive the payment overall.
 Does your argument draw a ring around IRA's? It was suggested that if your argument prevails, then these other plans would be affected as well.
 Only to the extent that -- that they are not payable for any of the reasons enumerated in the statute. If -- if they are available for payment at any time for any reason, then -- then they would not qualify. But the specified accounts, so long as they're payable for -- for one of the factors and that there's a direct nexus between the right to receive the payment and -- and the factors, then -- then they would qualify for the exemption. It is not, by any stretch, all IRA's. It is just the types that -- currently that the petitioners would have or that people would have that would allow the access at any time for any purpose. So it's not that the trustee is looking to have IRA's not be eligible for exemption. It's just the types of accounts from which all the funds can be withdrawn at any time for any purpose. There are many qualifying IRA's that do exist, that can exist. It's just that people have set these up from standard plans allowing them access. Whether they access the funds or not is not the key, but the ability to access the money because it doesn't meet the statutory requirements. There are several IRA's, though, that can and do meet the statutory requirements. It's just that the petitioners' don't. The case law in the Eighth Circuit was well settled, prior to the filing of this bankruptcy, that for approximately 12 years, that the definition of similar plan or contract did not include IRA's such as this, and that the on account of factors had to be satisfied to claim this exemption. The -- the debtors knew or -- or potentially should have known that -- that their IRA's were likely not exempt out of Eighth Circuit at the time that they filed because of the way that -- that these had been construed for a long period of time. So that they could have set up accounts that did qualify for such exemption, but -- but they did not restrict their access in that way. Thank you.
 Thank you, Ms. McKiever. Ms. Karlan, you have about 7 minutes. You're not required to use it all.
 I'm going to retire early. (Laughter.)
 The -- the first point is that there are two rights under IRA's: the right after age 59 and a half or upon death or disability or illness to withdraw the money without any kind of penalty; and there's a second little exercise, an entirely subsidiary right, which is the ability to withdraw money subject to a penalty earlier. The existence of that second entirely subsidiary, almost never used right -- and the statistic on this is in the green brief at page 23 -- means that the real essence of an IRA is it is a plan on account of age. The second point. As this Court said last year --
 You don't really have a right to receive it on account of age. You have a right to receive it without a penalty on account of age.
 Well, at the age of --
 It isn't the right to receive the money that depends on your age. It's the right to receive the money without paying a tax.
 Well, that's a right that's very important because let me give you just a mathematical example of the difference.
 It is a right that's important, but it's not what the statute says. The statute says --
 The statute gives that right.
 -- the right to receive a payment on account of, among other things, age.
 And you do have that right. You also have another right. But the existence of that second right doesn't negate the first right. The statute doesn't here, for example, as section 522 or section 365 of the Bankruptcy Code does, use the word solely to say you -- a plan is eligible only if you have solely the right to receive on this --
 No, but it lists the other reasons: on account of illness, disability, death, age, or length of service. And -- and, you know, when you have a list like that, you would think that the right to receive the money for some other reason doesn't -- doesn't qualify. I mean, I would think that that's --
 That might be your first thought, but then --
 Or -- or at least -- at least some other reason that isn't closely related to those.
 Oh, but I think even if that were your first thought, you would then get to the implication that many of the Justices have been pressing today, which is the implication of that for all plans is tremendous because all plans give -- well, I shouldn't say all plans, but I should say the vast majority of other plans, 401(k) plans, profit-sharing plans, and the like, do give you early access to your money, and that's valuable to you. That's why in section --
 Is it true that none of them give unfettered access? They're all qualified in some fashion. Do you agree with that?
 Well, the qualification of hardship has been interpreted by many employers to say, you want to buy a house and you can't otherwise? That's a hardship. You want to sent your kid to school and you can't otherwise? That's a hardship. You have huge, you know, consumer loans and you could consolidate that? That's a hardship. So it's not as if IRA's operate differently from everything else in the system. That's why --
 Well, yes. You -- you don't have to make up a hardship. You just say I want the money. Okay, you want the money? Here's the money.
 I think that's --
 I don't even have to lie about the hardship. I mean -- (Laughter.)
 I need the money. I don't have the money. That's a hardship. If you -- if all you have to say is the magic word hardship, I think that's why we would say IRA's are similar plans or contracts because this Court has made it clear similar is not the same thing as identical. So if similar reasons allow you to withdraw, that's enough. And that's why in section --
 In any of these other plans, can you get the money so long as you're willing to pay a penalty?
 As I read the New York City --
 Without any qualification for disability, illness. No. I just want the money. Give me the money and I'll pay you 10 percent. Is there any plan that works like that?
 I don't know, but the New York City Police Department plan appears to work like that. You can take the money out if you pay the 10 percent penalty.
 Has any judge ever taken the view that -- adopting Justice Scalia's approach, that while you can't put the whole IRA -- exempt the whole IRA, but you can exempt 10 percent of it?
 Not to my knowledge.
 At least you ought to get that much, it seems to me, under his -- his analysis.
 We'd be happier with 10 percent than nothing, but no judge has ever read the statute that way. The second point is a point that comes out of this Court's decision last year in the Till case where the Court said, look, you want to pick a manageable line, a line that's straightforward and familiar. And here's one that I'll give you that comes directly from the text of section 522(d)(10)(e), which is you should hold that section 522(d)(10)(e) permits the exemption of all plans or contracts that qualify under section 401(a), section 403(a), section 403(b), or section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code, which IRA's do. And this may have led to some of the confusion, I think, between counsel in this case, which is in the Andersen case, although Ms. Andersen was receiving money under section 408, it was not a 408 individual retirement account. It was, instead, under section 403(b), an individual retirement annuity. So there are, as far as we know, no individual retirement accounts, the things you put money into while the money accumulates before you're ready to retire and you transfer it into an annuity that are customizable. And indeed, for the kinds of debtors who need the protections of section 522(d)(10)(e) the most, the unsophisticated people who are putting their money away in an IRA because their pension plan either doesn't exist at all or isn't adequate for their retirement, the idea that they would understand to go in and negotiate at a bank for a customizable IRA strikes me as quite implausible. That's why we think the most sensible reading of the statute here is to exempt IRA's when the money in them is necessary for the support of the debtor. Thank you.
 Thank you. The case is submitted.
 We'll now hear argument in the case of Muehler against Mena. Mr. Phillips.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: At issue in this case is the safety of police officers when they attempt to execute a search warrant in an inherently unsafe situation.
 May I ask one preliminary question, Mr. Phillips? Do we have before us here any question at all about qualified immunity?
 Well, we do believe that a qualified immunity issue is bound up with the underlying merits. It was addressed that way by the Ninth Circuit because --
 But it wasn't -- it wasn't in the questions --
 This Court --
 -- on which we granted cert?
 This Court in Procunier treated the qualified immunity issue as part and parcel of the underlying merits of the case and -- and, in fact, skipped over the question of what 1983 meant in order to address the qualified immunity issue. And presumably --
 How -- how --
 -- the Court could do the same thing here.
 How do we do it? It goes right to the heart of this from you, the qualified immunity thing, for the reason that if you look at the facts and circumstances, it sounds to me like a somewhat close question as to whether the police did or did not exceed the reasonable bounds -- reasonable bounds. Now, if it's a close question, you have a jury verdict against you, and -- and then I think, well, yes, but I begin to come -- become disturbed if I think of qualified immunity. I mean, it isn't that clear. So -- so having read through the thing, I -- I preliminarily start by thinking, well, it could have been excessive force, I mean, given -- you know, I'm using that in quotes.
 Right.
 The jury said it was. Who am I to say it wasn't --
 Well, I mean, this -- this --
 -- in that situation? But qualified immunity. So now, what do I do?
 Well, in the first instance, it's reasonably clear to me that you're not bound by the jury's determination here. This Court has already --
 We -- don't we have to give any weight at all to the jury finding there or --
 With respect to the historical facts of the case, who did what to whom, of course, you have -- that -- that's subject to clearly erroneous review. On the issue of whether or not the conduct at issue here is reasonable, that's an issue of law or at least a mixed issue of fact --
 Well, a lot of it may depend on the --
 -- and law that this Court has decided as de novo.
 -- on the music as to handcuffing and what did they say and what was the atmosphere and what was the garage really like and how risky was it that there be gang members in the outhouses and -- and all kinds of stuff that you might sense from the testimony.
 It -- it seems to me that -- Justice Breyer, that the answer to all of those questions go to the core of what it means to exercise unquestioned command of the situation, which is a pure legal standard that this Court adopted a quarter of a century ago in Michigan v. Summers. And that's a question of law. To be sure, there are lots of elements of it, but what my position would be -- and obviously the officers' position in this case -- is that in exercising unquestioned command, you can accept all of the facts as you've just described them and none of that is excessive because it doesn't expose anyone to anything other than what is necessary in order to achieve complete control under the circumstances in order to ensure the protection of the individual officers and -- and candidly of the other individuals who were being -- being detained, all four of them, under these circumstances.
 Have you responded to my initial question? Have you said all you want to say about qualified immunity?
 No, Justice O'Connor. My -- my basic answer to that is that this Court already addressed that issue in Procunier. It considered that the qualified immunity issue was part and parcel of the issue, even though it hadn't been presented in the question presented, and indeed, I think in this case it's actually a -- a stronger argument that qualified immunity is in this case because that is the way that the Ninth Circuit specifically addressed the issue. It looked at under Saucier. It evaluated whether or not qualified immunity was appropriate and -- and did the two-part test, the first part being whether it was a constitutional violation and the second part whether or not it was reasonable under these particular circumstances. So if I -- if I cannot persuade you that this is constitutional, which obviously I -- I hope I can do, it seems to me absolutely unquestioned that there -- that what the officers did here under these circumstances were perfectly reasonable.
 Well, what is the -- what is the function of a jury in this case? What does the jury verdict stand for? And the jury doesn't return a special verdict and says we find X, Y, and Z. It finds whether the police exercised excessive force, and that's all we know from the jury verdict. Other -- I think what you're saying is that these cases should go off on summary judgment or even a demurrer. You assume all the facts as the plaintiff alleges them and then the Court decides whether that adds up to unreasonable within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment.
 I -- I'm not saying that that would be true in all cases. I do think in this particular case you did not need to have a jury verdict. We would have been prepared to stipulate to the facts as they were found ultimately and -- and giving the benefit of all of the inferences to the --
 We don't know the fact -- what facts were found because all we have is in the jury verdict that this was excessive force. Period. That's all.
 But that's just a conclusion of law, Justice Ginsburg. So the -- the facts that you know are the facts as they're described --
 But it's like was --
 -- by the respondent's brief.
 -- the defendant negligent. Is that more or less a conclusion of law? We don't know in what respect from the jury verdict. And here, were these police officers acting -- did they use excessive force.
 Well, we know precisely what they did. They kept her in handcuffs throughout the duration of the -- of the search. We know that. There's no -- there are no additional claims as to having mistreated her physically.
 Wasn't there a fact issue as to whether she was handcuffed for -- even for a short period after the search had been completed?
 I don't think there is a factual question like that because I don't think that question was presented to the jury, and it was certainly not the basis on which the Ninth Circuit affirmed the jury's verdict in this case. There -- there was never an argument made to the jury that this -- that this extended beyond the -- the period of the end of the search. The argument that was made to the jury was that the search should have -- should have been limited to the room where the suspect was -- was a resident or that the police should have made a decision somewhere in the -- before the end of the 2-hour search that she was no longer a threat to them. And then they were arguing that -- that it even went a little further in terms of the timing of it. But they never asked the jury to find that that 15 minutes was the basis for a Fourth Amendment violation in its own right.
 But if -- but if it made a difference as a matter of law, what -- what should we assume about that extra 15 minutes? Do we assume that they found the facts in the way that the -- a plaintiff argues them or that you think they are?
 I think if the jury had been asked to make that finding, that you -- and -- and the jury determined that there -- that it was unreasonable, then I think you'd have to conclude that the 15 minutes were, in fact -- that it did, in fact, go beyond 15 minutes. I do think there is still a legal issue as to whether that's de minimis under the circumstances. But -- but I agree. I mean, obviously there is a role for the jury's findings, and you have to give them a certain amount of respect. But on the core questions of reasonableness and suspicion and whether or not the police exercised unquestioned command and what those terms mean, this Court has already decided that in the Fourth Amendment context it has to decide those issues as a matter of law to regulate the conduct of all police officers and not simply do it on the basis of whatever a particular jury would say in a particular circumstance.
 Now, in doing it as a matter of law here, should we give consideration to the fact that in this case, if -- if I remember correctly, one of the officers testified that had they followed normal protocol, once they had, I think his phrase was, secured the building, the -- the main building --
 Well, the -- all of the grounds actually.
 Is that the whole compound?
 Yes.
 That -- that they would have -- they would have taken off the immediate restraints, and he wasn't sure why they didn't. We -- do we -- do we consider that when we're crafting our statement of law as -- as to what is or is not excessive?
 I think if this Court could determine that, as a matter of course, the -- the standard operating procedures in a particular way, that might certainly inform the Court's Fourth Amendment analysis. That -- I think what's important to keep in mind in this context, though, Justice Souter, is we're talking about four individuals who are being detained under these circumstances, and each of them poses a distinct issue for the police officers under the -- under -- when trying to decide how best to proceed. One of them had been found with marijuana in his possession. One of them had been determined to be an illegal alien, and the other two were individuals about whom the police knew virtually nothing. So, you know, is it possible that police procedure, generally speaking, when you're talking about a single occupant of the residence, oftentimes concludes that he can take away -- you can remove the handcuffs? That may be, although I don't think there's much in the record here to -- to reflect that. But what the police said here -- and I think it's extraordinarily important. Officer Muehler testified that if something had gone wrong, if either a police officer had been injured or one of the occupants of that house had been shot or otherwise harmed as a -- in the context of executing the search warrant, the first question that would have been asked is what was the least that could have been done to prevent those injuries from occurring. And he said to himself and he said it quite rightly -- and it's a rule this Court ought to embrace under the unquestioned command theory of -- of law -- is that if we keep them in handcuffs through the duration of a reasonable search, we will make our way through the search much more rapidly, much more efficiently in order to minimize the detention and we will eliminate -- and I mean, literally eliminate -- the entirety of the risk either to the individuals themselves, the occupants, the detainees, or to the police under these circumstances.
 Okay. I take it you obviously don't want us to -- to come down with a kind of a finicky version of -- of excessive force as the touchstone, and I take it you don't want us to come down with simply a blanket rule saying that essentially the police can do anything in -- in restraining occupants so long as it is not wantonly cruel. Somewhere in between. Do you have a -- a statement that would be the kernel of the holding that you want?
 I'm -- I'm quite comfortable with the way the Court analyzed it in Michigan v. Summers, that the officer is not required to evaluate the extent of the intrusion to be imposed by the seizure. That is, you -- you have a categorical rule that allows you, in the ordinary course, to do whatever is reasonably necessary in order to --
 But in the facts there, there were no handcuffs. He -- he was just detained. So --
 I understand that, and -- but my -- my position is that handcuffs don't materially affect the detention under these circumstances other than to assure what the Court said, which is unquestioned command of the situation.
 So -- I mean, I don't -- would -- would you say handcuffs are per se lawful for -- for purposes of applying Summers?
 Yes, but it's important to put that in context because Summers is a narrow exception to the -- not an exception. It's a narrow circumstance under the Fourth Amendment. You have to have a search warrant. It has to be a validly issued search warrant so that we know that there has either been a crime that's likely to be taking place in the premises. It only -- it only extends to the residents, occupants of the house, and it's only when the search is for contraband, not just for any evidence. So, for instance, when the police go the 60th time to Michael Jackson's estate to go try to find evidence of whatever is going on there, I don't think it's reasonable to go in and handcuff Michael Jackson and anybody else who happens to be on site.
 Well, it doesn't -- why is contraband magical? Wouldn't -- wouldn't your point be when -- when the reason they're investigating gives cause to believe that there may be physical danger --
 Justice Scalia --
 -- from letting people wander around?
 -- absolutely.
 Which is the case with contraband, but would be the case for many other reasons as well.
 I think the important point here is that we're talking about guns. These are gangs. These are guns. This is a circumstance that is inherently more dangerous than any other circumstance the police are likely to confront.
 But would you be happy then with a holding that says just what you said? We reaffirm Summers and -- but Summers said special circumstances or possibly a prolonged detention might lead to a different conclusion in an unusual case. And the only verdict part that I think we're concerned with here -- it was not about four people. It was one person, Iris Mena, and in respect to Iris Mena, the jury found that there was a violation of her -- of her Fourth Amendment rights. And as to her, you could have found -- you said -- I don't know if you misspoke. You said it could be more than 15 minutes. In looking at it, I was certain whether they kept her for 15 minutes more or more than 15 minutes more, maybe up to an hour more beyond the time that the search ended and kept her in handcuffs, both after the time they had secured the place and also after the time the search ended. Well, that would seem a basis for the jury's verdict and consistent with Summers.
 Well, it -- it could have been a basis for the jury's verdict if they had, in fact, put the issue of whether or not they were detained --
 But, Mr. -- Mr. -- but may I point out that the judge's instructions did put that issue to the jury at page 203. A police officer is required to release an individual detained in connection with a lawful search as soon as the officer's right to conduct the search ends or the search itself is concluded, whichever is sooner.
 Right. That -- I understand that, Justice Stevens, but the point we made in our reply brief is there's not a shred of evidence in this record and it was never argued to the jury that this search -- that -- that her detention lasted beyond the period of the search in this case. Indeed, counsel for the police officers specifically said in his closing argument, there is no issue but that she was released at the time of the -- that when -- as soon as the search was -- was ended, the -- the warrant was executed.
 I wonder why the judge gave this instruction then.
 Because -- because what he's -- well, you know, it's a reasonable instruction.
 And why -- why there was -- there was a special verdict of sorts, not a detailed one. But the two questions, question 5 and question 6, on page 255 of the joint appendix --
 Yes.
 One question concerns whether the force was excessive, and the other one is, do you find that she was detained for a longer period than reasonable? Those two questions -- my first is a procedural question. Did counsel for the defendants object to the jury getting -- those two questions being submitted to the jury?
 No, Justice Ginsburg. We didn't. And -- and --
 Well, it seems to me that the judge is asking the jury in these questions, one is whether there was a -- a detention, was force greater than was reasonable under the circumstances, and whether the duration was longer than reasonable under the circumstances.
 Right. Justice Ginsburg, you have to put that in context. The argument of the plaintiff in this case was that the detention should have ended at either of two points: after they had completely cleared the area and made it safe, or alternatively, at some point after that when they had asked her questions and determined that she had no particular involvement with Mr. Romero. Their argument was anything after that was unreasonable, and that's what the jury certainly found, was that that was the reasonable break point. Our argument is that's not consistent with the notion of unquestioned command and -- and is wrong as a matter of law. And there is no evidence -- no evidence. There was no testimony that she was kept for a period beyond the execution of that search warrant. It's very important to understand that.
 And you're saying that the -- the mere fact that it -- it went to the jury, even went to the jury without your objecting to it, does not mean we have to listen to what the jury said. Is that -- is that --
 Right. If it's wrong as a matter of law, that's -- then that's absolutely right. But there was no evidence in this case that they kept going. The only thing he said was, he -- he didn't remember. That was -- the question was put to the police officer. Was she kept beyond there? He said he didn't remember. He wasn't even the police officer who was involved in it. There's not a shred of evidence of that. It's totally made up. It wasn't their theory of the case in front of the jury. I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
 You might save your time. Yes. Mr. Shanmugam.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: When executing a search warrant to investigate a violent crime, officers may routinely use reasonable restraints on detained occupants in order to exercise unquestioned command over the situation and to facilitate the orderly completion of the search. The Ninth Circuit erred in holding that the officers' use of handcuffs in this case violated the Fourth Amendment. Under the standard for excessive force claims first articulated by this Court in Graham v. Connor, as informed by this Court's decision in Michigan v. Summers, the degree of force used here was not excessive. The same considerations that justified the detention of the occupants in Summers, most notably, the paramount concern of ensuring the safety of the officers and the occupants themselves, will ordinarily justify the precautionary use of handcuffs during the detention.
 Then this case should not have gone to the jury on the basis of what you said --
 We --
 -- because you -- you just said that this -- the handcuffs -- the circumstances -- the circumstances here were reasonable as a matter of law.
 Justice Ginsburg, that's correct. It is our view that as a matter of law, the officers would have been entitled to prevail on the constitutional issue with regard to excessive force. And it's worth noting, I think, that the officers did move for summary judgment. They also orally moved for judgment as a matter of law at the close of the evidence, and that motion was denied. Now, we also believe that the jury, quite frankly, was given insufficient guidance on the excessive force issue, and to turn to the jury instruction cited by Justice Stevens at page 203, it's quite clear that the jury only received one very general instruction on Summers detentions.
 Well -- well, has the -- the objection to the instruction been preserved here?
 Perhaps an argument could be made that it's fairly included within the questions presented. There was an objection made at trial and an objection made before the Ninth Circuit as well, but our fundamental position is that the jury was simply given insufficient guidance on the excessive force issue. This instruction --
 But on the -- on the question whether they preserved the issue, I -- I took it, implicit in what you said a minute ago, that yes, they did not object to the submission of the question. They did not object, in effect, to an instruction or giving of an instruction as such.
 That's correct.
 But they -- they had moved for judgment as a matter of law at the close of all the evidence, and that's enough to preserve the issue?
 I think that's true. It is true that they didn't object to the specific special verdict set of questions. I think they proposed slightly different language. But ultimately I think our primary submission is that as a matter of law on these facts, no constitutional violation occurred.
 When you -- is your objection that the jury wasn't given enough guidance on excessive force, or is it that the -- that the ultimate issue of excessive force is not a jury issue?
 We would concede, I think, Justice Scalia, that the issue should go to the jury where there are disputed issues of historical fact. We would submit that there are no relevant --
 Well, but is -- is excessive force an issue of historical fact any more than -- than unreasonable search or unreasonable seizure is an issue of historical fact?
 Well, there are certain --
 It's historical fact how long you held the person, whether the person was in handcuffs, but the ultimate question was, you know, is this force excessive. Is that any different from the question as -- of was this seizure unreasonable? If you submit the one to the jury, you may as well submit the other.
 Justice Scalia, those facts may be disputed in a particular case. We would submit that they really weren't disputed here, but there may actually be a dispute where the officers would say, yes, we used handcuffs and the --
 So when --
 -- or no we didn't use handcuffs.
 -- when you know all those facts, you're willing to send it to the jury to say, given all of these facts, it's up to you to decide whether unreasonable force was used or not.
 We believe that it is --
 It's not a matter of law.
 -- a mixed question of fact and law, and once the historical facts are established, it is essentially --
 Why -- why any more so -- why any -- any more so than -- than whether it's an unreasonable seizure?
 Well, we would submit that it is no different from the question whether officers had probable cause or reasonable suspicion on any given set of historical facts which this Court held in Ornelas was a question subject to de novo review, over your dissent, admittedly. And we believe that the primary rationale for the rule in Ornelas also applies here, namely that officers do need to have a consistent set of substantive guidelines by which they can judge the validity of their conduct.
 Are -- are you saying that the only basis on -- on which the jury could have ruled for the homeowner here, the -- the respondent, is that she was handcuffed for too long?
 We believe that that certainly is the primary issue that was at stake. And in fact --
 Well, I think you have to say that. Otherwise, we have to uphold the jury verdict, if we can assume that the jury might have thought, well, you know, the handcuffs -- the police had a right to do that, but she was held too long, she was -- they -- they yelled at her, she was taken into a -- a place that was uncomfortable. If -- if that's true, then we have to sustain the jury verdict.
 I think that the handcuffing was the key factor at trial, and I think that the best evidence of that, quite frankly, is that respondent in her proposed instructions referred only to handcuffing in her excessive force instruction. Unfortunately, that's not part of the joint appendix. It is part of the record.
 No, no. But the instruction that was given -- and one was read that's in the briefs -- it seems to me a -- a perfectly good instruction.
 I think that that's true, but I think that the instruction didn't really provide any guidance on excessive force specifically. It was really an instruction with regard to the reasonableness of the detention more generally, rather than with regard to excessive force specifically. It was not a Graham v. Connor type instruction.
 Well, then it seems to me it was the plaintiff's obligation to submit a clarifying instruction and to bring this -- the denial of that instruction here.
 Well, there were objections to the instruction below, and all I can say is that perhaps an argument could be made -- and perhaps Mr. Phillips will make the argument on rebuttal -- that it is fairly included within the questions presented.
 I don't know how you can -- you can say that the only thing that was before the jury was the handcuff when the -- there was evidence that she was treated very roughly in -- in the first instance, she was woken from her sleep, she wasn't told that they were police, she thought they were robbers, and she feared for her life. That doesn't drop out of the case and what the jury was asked to determine.
 Justice Ginsburg, it was the primary issue before the jury, and to be sure, there were other issues. I think that the other relevant use of force was the initial detention at gunpoint, but -- and those -- and I would add that those are the two factors on which the Ninth Circuit relied in affirming the jury's verdict. Our submission is that both with regard to the initial use of force and with regard to the continued use of force, the justifications of Graham v. Connor support the officers' use of force in both instances.
 But -- but may I just ask a sort of very basic question? One of the instructions reads, a detention may be unreasonable if it -- if it is unnecessarily painful, degrading, prolonged, or if it involves an undue invasion of privacy. Now, are you telling us that you think the answer to that question is a question of law that the judge should provide rather than the jury?
 Assuming that that instruction is correct -- and that might very well be a valid instruction --
 Well, it was correct.
 It may very well be a correct instruction --
 All right.
 -- with regard to a challenge to the manner of the detention itself. In that instance, then the jury does have a certain amount of leeway, but I think even then the teaching of Ornelas --
 Then it's not a question of law. The answer to whether it was unnecessarily painful, degrading, prolonged, or involved undue invasion of privacy, is that a question of law or a question of fact to the jury?
 It is a mixed question of law and fact, and the jury's job is --
 It's a mixed question?
 The jury's job is to -- to resolve the underlying factual issues and then --
 Well, I understand the historical fact, but I'm -- I'm questioning you about the conclusions that you draw from the unreasonableness, degrading, and so forth. Is that partly to be decided by the jury or entirely by the judge?
 We believe that that actually is ultimately a judge issue in the same way that the issue of whether or not probable --
 So this instruction should not have been given.
 That's correct --
 I thought your position was that it -- it may be submitted to the jury, but that it may be reviewed as a question of law simply because that's the way we are able to set standards for later cases.
 I think that's exactly right, and I think that that is the teaching of Ornelas. And it may very well be that a more specific instruction should have been given so as to make clear that the jury had specific issues of historical fact to resolve. But ultimately we do believe that it's a question of law in the sense that it should be reviewed de novo for precisely the reasons given in Ornelas. And if I could just say a couple words on the substantive issue of excessive force. We believe that in cases involving violent crimes, officers should routinely be allowed to use handcuffs. In this case, I would just add that there were several additional case-specific factors that justified the use of handcuffs. In addition to the fact that this was a violent crime, the officers had reason to believe that at least one and possibly two members of a violent gang were living at the house. In addition, the officers had previously visited the house on two occasions to investigate other violent crimes and had encountered resistance on at least one of those occasions. And our fundamental problem with the Ninth Circuit's rule is that it seems to suggest that officers in the course of a detention should really stop and investigate whether or not each -- each individual that they encounter poses a safety threat. And we believe that that rule is as unworkable as it is unwise. It would effectively divert officers from the primary task at hand and could perversely have the effect of prolonging rather than expediting the completion of the search. And for that reason, we believe that the Ninth Circuit's rule, its substantive constitutional rule, was erroneous.
 How long did it take them to find out whether the -- these other dangerous people were there?
 To find out whether?
 Whether the people they were afraid of were -- were on the premises?
 Well, you know, I don't know that they ever actually made a -- a determination other than that Mr. Romero was not on the premises. I think they figured that out once they had actually identified each of the individuals, which was fairly early on in the detention.
 Thank you. Mr. Hoffman.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Let me start on the issue of -- that Mr. Phillips said we made up. Actually we didn't make it up. The claim that Ms. Mena was detained past the time of the search was made throughout the case. If you look at footnote 3 in the Ninth Circuit opinion in 2000, the issue of the length of the detention was a factual issue that precluded summary judgment. Ms. Mena claimed that the detention lasted for 2 to 3 hours. The officers claimed that it lasted 90 minutes. But more than that, the -- the jury -- the -- the special verdict asked the jury to find whether Ms. Mena had been kept for a longer time than reasonable, and in fact, in the closing argument, it was argued that Ms. Mena had been kept beyond the time that the search ended. And not only is there not any -- not only is there evidence in the record, there is overwhelming evidence in the record that Ms. Mena was kept for a period of time, at least 30 minutes, give or take, and possibly as long as an hour. And this is not based on Ms. Mena's testimony.
 Do you find that the -- that the -- do you define the end of the search as before they started videotaping everything they had done?
 Well, they were videotaping during the course of the search. But if I can go through the facts which might clarify things. Officer Muehler, who was the officer in overall charge of the -- of the search, testified at trial that the search ended at 8:40 a.m. Officer Brill said a little bit later than that. He tied -- but there's a second video. There are two videos. The second video is from 8:50 to 8:57. At the time that the second -- the second video started at 8:50, Officer Brill testified that the search was over. The -- the evidence log -- the last entry on the evidence log is 8:45 in terms of evidence being logged into the -- into the case. Officer Brill testified that Ms. Mena was kept for at least 10 or 15 minutes after the end of the second video and her handcuffs were not released until she was brought back around from the -- the separate converted garage back into the house and --
 Where -- where is that testimony?
 The testimony -- Officer Brill's testimony? Is actually -- they cite joint appendix number -- on 75 where he says he doesn't recall. On the next page, in joint appendix number 76, he's asked -- they continue to ask the question. And isn't it your memory that about 10 or 15 minutes after that, Iris Mena was released? That would sound consistent. And that's 10 or 15 minutes after 8:57. In addition, Ms. Mena testified that she was kept between 2 or 3 hours, and that was actually consistent with prior testimony by the videographer herself, who testified in deposition and was impeached at trial, that it was 2 or 3 hours that the search lasted. The -- the point being -- and if you take the distance between Officer Muehler's testimony and Officer Brill's testimony, Ms. Mena was -- was kept in handcuffs at the end of a very long detention in handcuffs, for a period of approximately 27 to 33 minutes, if you don't even take Ms. Mena's testimony into account. And one of the ironies of the case is that there's testimony that Mr. Romero, the actual target of the case, was released at 8:45 at the time the search ended. And so while this --
 But not from these premises.
 No. But in fact, this was a -- the search warrant was for two premises. He was picked up at his mother's house. And in fact, Officer Muehler had -- was -- was to radio the start of both searches, and so there was --
 But the -- the -- I thought that this poorhouse, or whatever it was called -- that the warrant covered weapons that were there.
 Yes.
 That they were looking for weapons.
 They were looking for a gun.
 They were not looking for a gun at Romero's mother's house, were they?
 Well, I think the --
 Did they have a warrant, a search warrant?
 I think the warrant covered -- I think they were looking for the gun wherever it was found, and -- and the -- I believe the warrant --
 Well, this was a -- this was a pretty extensive search warrant that they had.
 Yes.
 Did they have something like that, the same kind of warrant for the --
 Well, it's the same warrant I believe, Your Honor, in terms of -- we don't have -- there's not a lot of information in the record about --
 Well, wasn't -- I thought that this warrant referred to a particular address, a particular house, not -- not any house where one might find Romero.
 No, no, no. It -- it referred to the two houses, one on Cimmaron.
 Well, was the other house his mother's house?
 Yes. The location number one is his mother's house, 2646 Cimmaron, and that's -- and Officer Muehler and this team was in charge of both of these searches pursuant to the same warrant. They had information that -- the reason they did that is that they had information that -- that he lived in this poorhouse, that he rented a room from the Menas at the poorhouse, and that he also visited his -- his mother from time to time.
 Then that would make it even more curious if the place where the dangerous man was wasn't searched extensively and -- and the mother -- nobody was put in handcuffs, and yet for this -- they knew pretty soon that Romero wasn't on the premises.
 Well, they knew right away.
 Yes. And that's, I guess, your -- your point, that the place where the dangerous man was is not --
 I think that that explains one of the reasons why the jury imposed punitive damages here because they -- they knew that at 8:45, at the time that Officer Muehler said that the search was over and all the officers were out of the house and -- and everything was done, that Mr. Romero was cited and released for marijuana possession. And at the same time, from 8:45 until sometime after 9 o'clock, probably as long as 30, maybe longer, Iris Mena was sitting in a cold, damp, converted garage with her hands behind her back.
 You might be able to keep your verdict, I -- I think. But I think the problem here is the Ninth Circuit -- you go to the Ninth Circuit and you say, you know, there was excessive force here on anybody's definition for reasons that you say. And -- and the Ninth Circuit says, oh, it was a clear violation of the Constitution and we'll tell you why, and then they give some reasons. And two of those reasons are, A, four and a half pages written the reason that this was unconstitutional is because they asked her questions about her immigration status, which you -- I don't think you even raised. Maybe you did. But anyway, that's -- that's the bulk of the -- of -- of -- that's the bulk of the analysis. And -- and these are the words that I think they're objecting to. And by any standard of reasonableness, Mena was -- the -- the officers should have released her from the handcuffs when it became clear that she posed no immediate threat. And that was long before the -- the -- because she wasn't a threat. And that was long before the end of the search. And what their point is on that is, you know, if that's the rule, that's going to interfere with our SWAT teams because they can't operate that way. They -- they can't evaluate the individual. They put the individual -- if there are guns and gangs and danger that she'll grab a gun, they put her in handcuffs, and they hold her there for the search for a couple of hours, then they release her. Now, that's their argument. So they're objecting not so much to -- to the fact they have to pay $30,000 -- or they may object to that. But they're -- they're objecting to the holding of the Ninth Circuit, and if they're right on that, then I guess we have to send it back and say, do this over again, though I'll be sorry about that and maybe there is a way not to do it. But -- but I want to know your view of what I see as those two issues here, that the Ninth Circuit's analysis was wrong.
 Yes. I mean, first of all, I'd -- I'd say that the -- the Court could affirm the judgment in this case and the verdict in this case on the ground that we --
 Yes, but then we can't really reach the issue. That's a possibility. I see that.
 And in fact -- and I -- I think that would be the appropriate thing to do.
 Well, but then suppose that the reason that this case is here is because of the implications --
 Right.
 -- of the Ninth Circuit's analysis --
 Right.
 -- not necessarily the extra 30 minutes because I see your point on the extra 30 minutes.
 I think -- I think that there -- I would divide my response to that, Justice Breyer, into two parts really. On the questioning issue, I would just say that that -- that was not an issue that was presented to the jury for its verdict as a separate Fourth Amendment violation. It wasn't. And we didn't argue it in the Ninth Circuit. What we did -- we did say in our -- in our brief to the Ninth Circuit that she was questioned about her immigration status about an issue that was unrelated to -- to Summers detention. We did say that.
 Well, we could say is their opinion -- that's their opinion. It's beside the point, et cetera.
 Right. So, I mean, I -- I think on questioning, you know, we -- we haven't been pushing that issue.
 If -- if two of the reasons that the Ninth Circuit gave are in our view incorrect, why wouldn't we reverse and remand for them to do it without -- to make the judgment without taking those two factors into account?
 Well, I think what -- first of all, it's a separate alternative holding. What they said is that there was a separate Fourth Amendment violation while they affirmed on the basis that we actually won on. The jury found that she had been detained longer than was reasonable and with more force than was reasonable. This is a jury verdict. The Ninth Circuit affirmed that. And we've argued in our brief that if the Court did something on questioning, it would really be issuing an advisory opinion in this -- in this situation. And, you know, we've -- we've argued the point and we're prepared certainly to argue about the merits of that question because it's obviously an important question. In our view, the questioning issue should be governed by the more traditional Terry kind of idea that you can't question when it goes beyond the scope of the limited purposes of the intrusion, but we also understand that that's contested.
 Well --
 I don't --
 -- well, it does seem to me that --
 Excuse me.
 It -- it does seem -- seem to me that the Ninth Circuit's opinion is questionable on -- on this key point of when she had to be released. The officers should have released her when it became clear she posed no immediate threat and did not resist arrest.
 Well --
 I think that is critical to its holding.
 Well --
 And that implies that they have a -- a duty at the outset to determine whether -- what her status is rather than to go around looking for guns and -- and to secure the premises. That's -- that's one of my concerns with that.
 Well, I would have a different position on that. First of all, I think that the judgment can actually be affirmed on the first ground regardless of this issue because it was a -- a jury verdict and -- and the damages were asked for either/or in terms of question 5 or 6.
 The -- the first ground being? Just an unreasonably long --
 Detained beyond the -- the length of the search. And so I think technically the judgment can be affirmed on that ground. But with respect to the handcuffing, the position that we would say is that, first of all, you -- you would have to view the facts in the light most favorable to the verdict. Now, it's been -- there's been a lot of questioning about what that means and what the jury's role is. As we understand it, if Ornelas applies to this decision, which we assume the Court would do -- and that is, that you would first have to take the light -- all the facts in the light most favorable to the verdict, including the possibility that the -- the jury rejected as being incredible the statements that the officers made in terms of justification, if there was evidence in the record to show that there was contradicting evidence, which there is in this record. And so the facts that -- that the other side has tried to argue are the facts on which you would make that constitutional decision are not the facts in the light most favorable to the verdict. In the light most favorable to the verdict, there was -- there was lots of planning. There was a tactical plan in writing that the jury got to see, which said that the -- the plan here was to go in and make the SWAT entry, to see if there were non-suspects there. They would be patted down, identified, and released. The jury was entitled not to believe the other side's claim that they didn't say when they were going to be released and believed that the plan was to release them as soon as it was ascertained that they did not have the connection in -- in the situation. And in fact, there's testimony from the officers that they knew that they weren't gang members and they knew that they weren't connected to the crime. And they were completely cooperative, and they didn't resist arrest and they didn't flee. And Iris Mena is 5 foot 1 -- 5 foot 2 inches, and the jury had a videotape of exactly how they looked. The officers had a total plan. They -- they exercised their command of the situation from the beginning. They cleared it. They made sure it was safe. They took people outside through the pouring rain, which actually they say there wasn't evidence about that.
 Medium -- medium rain.
 Well, actually at -- at joint appendix number 183, Officer Allegra, who was one of the entry team, said it was pouring. So -- and in fact, the stipulation of facts said it was heavy. So Iris Mena was being -- was being demure when she talked about that. You can even see the rain on the videotape. And so they took her outside. They took all of them outside. They put them in this little room, which is not connected to the house. They had one or two armed officers outside. There was no place for them to go. They couldn't interfere with the facilitation of the search because they were in this room. They couldn't flee because there's only one way out, a door. There were two armed guards there. And -- and if all they had to do was sit these four people, who were not connected to any gang activity, as to which they had no suspicion ever developed that they had any connection to Mr. Romero, who had already been arrested at his mom's house --
 They can't have a flat rule that while you're conducting a search, you -- you can restrain anybody that you find assuming the search is for a crime that -- that involves violence.
 Well, I think that the --
 I don't want to have to make that call all the time, you know.
 Well, but -- but officers do make that call all the time. They make it in the context of Terry stops. They make it in the context of lots of Fourth Amendment issues. In Summers -- in Summers, the man was detained. In many of the post-Summers cases, including many cited by the other side and the Government, handcuffing is not viewed as routine. Handcuffing is viewed as something that substantially aggravates the nature of the seizure --
 If that's true, is it routine in -- I mean, here what sort of pushes the other way on this is this is a dangerous gang. They have lots of weapons and they have previously gone to this house, which I gather -- sometimes when I read it, I think it's like a warren of little rooms. On the other hand, maybe it isn't. I haven't seen the house. There are a lot of buildings around, and they think a lot of people here -- we don't know who's what, and we make a mistake in this and we're dead. You know, I mean, so that's painting it the other way. But where you have guns and -- and houses and gangs and so forth, now that's why they say that it's reasonable in those circumstances to say, when we find someone in the house, we handcuff them through the search. We might let them go earlier, but that's up to us and we don't want the courts second guessing us on that. Now, what's -- what's painting it their way, and I'd like you to respond.
 I -- I understand that. I guess the -- the problem with that is that that means that no matter who they find -- and in this case is a good example of it. They were worried that they might find the gang member who had a gun there, and that's what they were looking for. Okay. And so they used the SWAT team. That seems perfectly reasonable that they would use a SWAT team the way they did. And they went in and within literally 4 or 5 minutes, they had -- this is a tiny, little house. They had cleared the house. They had figured out all the occupants. They put them in a room completely under their control where they couldn't get away from anything. They knew there were two 40-year-old people, a young hippie, and -- and an 18-year-old girl that was 5 foot --
 Did they search that room?
 Yes. They searched that room. So the room was searched before they went there. They searched all the rooms. They searched Ms. Mena's room and found absolutely nothing there. And -- and the testimony -- and this goes to Justice Souter's question.
 Did they -- did they search the individuals too to make sure --
 Yes.
 I assume they did.
 Oh, yes. They -- they searched the individuals. They -- they -- you know, they completely made sure that -- that when they put them in that back room, there was nothing in the room. There was nothing on the individuals. There was nothing that -- that could cause them danger. And -- and the jury, I think, was entitled to -- to look at those facts and -- and to hear the facts and to see the facts --
 How did the qualified immunity question get resolved here?
 Well, the --
 And what -- what role did that play in all of this?
 Well, at the -- at the district court level, the -- the district court heard a rule 59. But one of the things about this case is it was tried right around the time that Saucier v. Katz came out, and in the Ninth Circuit, there was a question about who got to decide qualified immunity. This was June 2001 actually. And so there was a rule 59 motion about whether the proper standard of qualified immunity had been applied. The district judge, looking at the facts, found that there were facts to sustain the verdict, including evidence that Ms. Mena had been kept after the end of the search. The district judge found that. And then in -- in the Ninth Circuit, of course, the Ninth Circuit's published opinion deals with qualified immunity on both of these issues. And basically the -- the qualified immunity -- on the -- on the over-detention claim, I think they've conceded that there just isn't any justification for -- I mean, a de minimis exception doesn't extend to 30 minutes. I mean, that -- this Court has debated whether 15 or 20 is too long on a -- on a Terry stop when there's actually reasonable suspicion. Here, there's nothing to hold her. With respect to the handcuffing issue --
 Is it clear that it was 30?
 Well, I think in viewing the light most favorable to the verdict, I think the Court has to assume that -- that the jury could have found an hour. But what I'm saying is based on the officer's own testimony alone, viewed in the light most favorable to the verdict, it's at least 27 to 32. And so you've got something that just could not possibly be considered de minimis under any kind of exception. And -- and that's why they fought it on the facts. They haven't even made an argument on the law at any point in this. And with respect to handcuffing, I think our position on the handcuffing is that Summers, first of all, doesn't deal with handcuffing. And the other side has consistently tried to equate detention with restraint. And I think what -- what Summers indicated was that this Court was willing to allow people to be detained during the course of a search for three specific reasons. And when balancing the nature of the intrusion against the justifications, this Court specifically said it was endorsing a limited intrusion, and that it wouldn't be very much different asking someone to sit around --
 Doesn't that just go to the point that it's not clearly established at least?
 Well, no. I -- I don't think that is the case, Justice Kennedy, because in -- in -- Summers doesn't authorize what they did. Graham certainly talks about having to justify force based on a -- on a Fourth Amendment analysis. And Franklin v. Foxworth, which is a Ninth Circuit case that happened before this case, the Court, first of all, used the -- the analysis that we have argued is appropriate based on Summers and Graham to decide that a particular Summers detention was carried out in an unreasonable manner.
 Well, but that was ill individual, a single individual --
 Well --
 -- unclothed, et cetera --
 No. I -- I understand that the facts were more egregious, but the -- the Court's analysis for a reasonable officer from a qualified immunity standpoint -- for a reasonable officer reading that opinion, you draw at least three conclusions I think. One is that the proper analysis to determine whether handcuffing or some additional form of restraint is -- is allowed has to be decided under the kinds of justifications that Summers provides and under a Graham analysis when it comes to force. And there's lots of cases that -- that allow officers to do that. Lots of lower court cases. In fact, our view is all the lower court cases follow that kind of analysis and just come out differently depending on the facts and circumstances confronted. The second thing, the -- the point about the disabled person and the particular facts made that case particularly egregious, and the Ninth Circuit said those were additional factors, not the line. The Ninth Circuit didn't say that the constitutional standard was particularly abusive or egregious. It -- it applied traditional Fourth Amendment analysis. And finally and I think very important and not dealt with maybe in the briefs as much as it should be is that the Ninth Circuit in -- in Franklin rejected a blanket handcuffing policy. That's what the policy was in Portland. The Portland police department had a policy that said you are to handcuff everybody until the search is over. And the Ninth Circuit said you can't have that kind of policy because Summers and -- and Graham require it to be individualized justification for that -- for an additional intrusion beyond the limited intrusion that's allowed in Summers. And in fact, in Summers, the Court went out of its way to say to compare with what the Court was allowing to what it -- to -- to the circumstances in Dunaway, to -- to circumstances that start to look like an arrest. And I don't know how much more intrusive you could be than what these officers did to Iris Mena, and I think that's one of the -- the issues here. If -- if the --
 And what do we do if we think the Ninth Circuit was off base in -- in whether Mena could be questioned about her immigration status?
 Well, I -- I think that --
 That seemed to be an important part of the Ninth Circuit's rule.
 Well, it's certainly -- it's certainly an alternative ground. It's not -- it doesn't affect, I think, our verdict. And so I think what -- I mean, I suppose the Court could dismiss that question as improvidently granted, could say to the court that it -- that it should reverse that part of the ruling.
 It might be useful to say they were wrong in --
 Well, that -- you -- you could say that. I mean, I would -- on the merits of the question, I -- I would like to -- if we were reaching that, I would argue that the Ninth Circuit -- that -- that there is -- there should be a limit on questioning in a -- in a Summers detention, and the Court should apply the kind of Terry analysis that the majority of the -- the circuits apply.
 What -- what will do if we thought the Ninth Circuit was egregiously wrong on that and that its opinion was, to use the most polite word, disingenuous when it talked about a garage? That -- that was somewhat off-putting to me when it was a converted garage with a bed.
 Well, I mean --
 I mean, I -- I thought this woman was standing in -- by some grease rack or something and she was --
 She wasn't standing by a grease rack, but she was made to sit initially by an open door because the door had basically been obliterated on a very cold, rainy February morning where she was very cold, and after -- and had been taken through the -- the pouring rain in bare feet and with only a T-shirt and was left there for at least 20 or so minutes without being given a coat or shoes. And she was made to sit by there and she was very cold and uncomfortable. And she did complain that the handcuffs were too tight and she complained that they were uncomfortable and could they be removed. It's not a garage in -- in the way that the vision of it, but also if you look at it, it's -- and the -- the jury did look at it because it had a videotape of this. You could see that the -- the occupants were made to be in a very uncomfortable situation that was unnecessary. And that -- that was clearly established law in the Ninth Circuit certainly under Franklin that the manner of a search that was unnecessarily prolonged or painful or an unnecessary invasion of privacy was clearly established law in the Ninth Circuit as of 1994. I think in the Heitschmidt case, which is very similar in a lot of ways to our case, that came out after the search, but applied the same reasoning to a 1994 search. You had the same kind of handcuffing of a non-suspect as to whom the -- the officers didn't have that -- that kind of -- of suspicion. And the Fifth Circuit found that that was a violation and denied qualified immunity to the officers. So from our standpoint, on the issue of being detained past the time, I think it's just a clear case. I think the other side has conceded that if -- if there's this evidence in the record, which there is, the judgment has to be affirmed on that basis. On -- on the handcuffing issue, we believe the same principle has to apply because the facts have to be viewed in the light most favorable to the verdict, and when you view those facts, I -- it -- it is -- no reasonable officer would believe you could do those things to Ms. Mena in these circumstances based on the law at the time. And I think that it would be -- what the -- what the United States and -- and what petitioners' counsel is asking for is really for a radical change of law themselves. We're happy with Summers and Graham and the way that applies, and the -- the jury instruction was based on -- on Summers and Graham and on Franklin. The language is taken directly from those cases. And -- and the -- the jury in a case like this -- qualified immunity obviously provides some protection for -- for officers that when -- when a reasonable officer wouldn't know these things. But jury verdicts also play a crucial role in a civil rights case. In this case, a jury of our community found that Iris Mena had been subjected to an abuse of -- a specific abuse of authority in being held beyond the time of -- of the search, even at a time when the prime target was -- was free to go about his business with a citation, and was held in these painful handcuffs for a period of over 2 hours in circumstances where, in the totality of the circumstances, she was treated much more harshly than anything this Court, I think, contemplated in the Summers case. And I think that officers know how to -- officers know how to handle the Fourth Amendment issues involved in this case. They don't need a special rule because that rule would end up meaning that when you go in and you don't find what you're afraid of, that everybody is still going to be subjected to this kind of serious intrusion on their individual liberty. And so we would urge the Court not to go down this new path that the United States and the petitioners are asking and to affirm the judgment because it was based on clearly established principles that this Court and other courts around the country have -- have established. Thank you very much.
 Thank you, Mr. Hoffman. Mr. Phillips, you have about 3 and a half minutes.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens. I want to start with essentially the question that Justices Breyer and Kennedy raised, which is what do you do when you know that the Ninth Circuit is wrong, that the questioning here violated the Fourth Amendment, and what do you do when you know that the Ninth Circuit was wrong in saying that the officers have an affirmative duty in the middle of a Summers detention to make an assessment on an individualized basis as to the risks posed by any individual detainee. Those are rulings that I submit to you are plainly erroneous and warrant reversal on that basis alone. At that stage, if the respondent wants to argue to the Ninth Circuit that that 15 minutes is, in fact, proved by the facts of this case, that's fine, but understand, those issues were put to the Ninth Circuit, and the Ninth Circuit did not affirm on the alternative ground that there were 15 minutes here. The Ninth Circuit expressly never -- or didn't expressly but never said one word about a period of time after the search ended in this particular case, and that's not an accident because there is no testimony. The officer said he didn't remember and when asked, well, would 10 to 15 minutes be consistent with your memory, well, of course, it would. He didn't remember anything. So there's nothing in that evidence, and there's no way -- I have looked at that tape. I ask you to look at that tape. I guarantee you there's no way you can draw any inference as to at what point in this process she was released vis-a-vis the end of this particular -- this particular search being executed.
 So -- so do we have the tape here?
 I assume you have the tape. It's part of the record. It should be in the clerk's office. If you don't have it, I'd be more than happy to send you a copy. The --
 But there was no -- there was no objection to that question going to the jury, was the duration unreasonable.
 Of course not, Justice Ginsburg, because the issue before the jury was whether or not the -- we had an affirmative duty to make an evaluation in the middle of the search as to whether or not she posed a -- a threat. That was --
 But the jury --
 -- their theory of the case, and that's what the Ninth Circuit said, is yes, we do have that affirmative obligation.
 But the jury answered the -- just the general question, was the duration unreasonable, and the jury said yes.
 Not of the search. Of her detention.
 Yes.
 Yes, of her detention. And that was based on the jury's determination that we had detained her beyond the period we had done the sweep.
 So if the district court got it right and the Ninth Circuit wrote a poor opinion, why should we upset the judgment in the case? In other words, if what we had here was a trial that was okay, a district judge that behaved -- gave a proper charge, then the Ninth Circuit writes an opinion that doesn't seem to deal with what the district court and the jury decided.
 Well, the -- the court of appeals' obligation here was to evaluate our argument that we should -- we were entitled to judgment as a matter of law. The court of appeals put forth what it regarded as the most legitimate bases on which to affirm the judgment in this case. The fact that neither of those withstand serious scrutiny, Justice Ginsburg, seems to me to be a basis for reversing the Ninth Circuit and allowing the matter to go back at this point. And -- and that is exactly what this Court does in -- you know, said it will do in Ornelas, that it is a de novo review. Punitive damages, exactly like a punitive damages cases. Juries make punitive damages determinations every day and every day courts of appeals and trial judges review those damages awards de novo because they -- because the question is not just what are the historical facts -- that you give deference to the jury on -- but on the fundamental question of what is the rule of law that will govern the police officers in the execution of search warrants in circumstances like this. They need protection, Your Honor. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Phillips. The case is submitted.
 We will now hear argument in Gonzales, et al. against Raich. General Clement.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Through the Controlled Substances Act, Congress has comprehensively regulated the national market in drugs with the potential for abuse. And with respect to Schedule I substances, like marijuana, that have both a high potential for abuse and no currently accepted medical use in treatment, Congress categorically prohibits interstate trafficking outside the narrow and carefully controlled confines of federally approved research programs.
 Well, Mr. Clement, the -- I think it is reasonably clear that Congress spoke very broadly in the Act, and the question, for me, turns on whether Lopez and Morrison dictate some concerns with its application in this context.
 Well, with respect, Justice O'Connor, I don't think either Lopez or Morrison casts any doubt on the constitutionality of the Controlled Substances Act, and I think, in particular, that's because the decisions in Lopez and Morrison cited, with approval, cases like Darby and Wickard, and preserved those cases. And, of course, the concurring opinion of Justice Kennedy did so, as well.
 Well, but in Wickard, of course, you had a wheat grower, a small farmer, and his wheat did, in part, go in the national market. You don't have that here. As I understand it, if California's law applies, then none of this home-grown for medical-use marijuana will be on any interstate market. And it is in the area of something traditionally regulated by states. So how do you distinguish Morrison? And how do you distinguish Lopez?
 Well, Justice O'Connor, let me first say that I think it might be a bit optimistic to think that none of the marijuana that's produced consistent with California law would be diverted into the national market for marijuana. And, of course, the Controlled Substances Act is concerned, at almost every step of the Act, with a concern about diversion, both of lawful substances from medical to non-medical uses and from controlled substances under Schedule I into the national market.
 Well, in looking at this broad challenge, do we have to assume that the State of California will enforce its law? I mean, if it turns out that it isn't and that marijuana is getting in the interstate market, that might be a different thing.
 Well, with respect, Justice O'Connor, on this record, I don't think that there's any reason to assume that California is going to have some sort of almost unnatural ability to keep one part of a fungible national drug market separate. And I think Congress, here, made important findings that you've alluded to, not just that there's a national market, not just that the intrastate and the interstate markets are linked, but that drugs are fungible, and that because drugs are fungible, it's simply not feasible, in Congress' words, to regulate and separately focus on only drugs that have traveled on interstate commerce.
 Well, General Clement, what if we were to assume -- I'm not saying this is -- that the District Court could find that there is a narrow segment of the market in which they could prevent diversions, and they had -- say they made such findings. Would we have to disregard them, or say they were irrelevant?
 I think you would say they were irrelevant, Justice Stevens, and that's because --
 But then why do you need to rely on the possibility of diversion?
 Well, because I think it is a reality, in responding to Justice O'Connor's question -- I think that in -- obviously, in all of these commerce --
 Yeah, but in my hypothesis, it's a nonexistent reality.
 Well, in your hypothetical -- and if I could turn to that -- I still think the analysis would not turn on whether or not the truth of the supposition that diversion could be prevented, because this Court, in a series of cases, including Darby, Wickard, Wirtz, and Perez, has made clear that the relevant focal point for analysis is not the individual plaintiff's activities and whether they have a substantial effect on interstate commerce, but whether the class of activities that Congress has decided to regulate has such a substantial effect. And, in this case, there's no question that the overall production, distribution, and possession of marijuana and other Schedule I substances has a profound effect on interstate commerce.
 But it's not an interstate commerce that you want to foster. I mean, in these other -- in these other cases, Congress presumably wanted to foster interstate commerce in wheat, in Wickard v. Filburn. Congress doesn't want interstate commerce in marijuana. And it seems rather ironic to appeal to the fact that home-grown marijuana would reduce the interstate commerce that you don't want to occur in order to regulate it. I mean, you know, doesn't that strike you as strange?
 Well, no, it doesn't, Justice Scalia, but let me respond in two ways. First of all, I think it's been clear, at least since the lottery case, that Congress' authority to regulate interstate commerce includes the authority to prohibit items traveling in interstate commerce and to declare something contraband in interstate commerce.
 Absolutely.
 And I would suggest that it is a perfectly rational exercise of Congress' judgement to treat marijuana and other Schedule I substances not just as contraband in interstate commerce, but as contraband simpliciter, as contraband for all purposes.
 But that's quite a different rational than from Wickard v. Filburn. I mean, it seems to me you're not -- you're not appealing to the fact that it has a substantial impact on interstate commerce. You're appealing to the fact that the power which Congress has to prohibit the use of goods carried in interstate commerce cannot effectively be implemented without this law.
 Well, I think there's some truth to that, Justice Scalia, but let me say this. I think what I'm saying is, I'm taking the rational that this Court accepted in Wickard, and I'm applying it to a different regulatory regime. Here, Congress --
 But you're applying it to the opposite kind of regulatory -- you're applying it to a regulatory regime in which the government wants to prohibit this subject -- substance from being sold or -- in interstate commerce. And if you just follow the litter -- letter of this law, this marijuana won't get into interstate commerce. In fact, it would reduce the demand for marijuana, because it would supply these local users and they wouldn't have to go into the interstate market.
 Well, with respect, Justice Stevens, if you took a look at the Controlled Substances Act, itself, and read it literally, you'd assume that there was absolutely no market, period, in Schedule I substances. But the reality is, there's a $10.5 billion market -- illegal market, albeit -- but market in marijuana in the United States, on an annual basis. So --
 But to the extent that this statute has any impact, it will reduce the purchase in the interstate market and confine these to locally grown marijuana.
 Well, first of all, Justice Stevens, that's only true if there will be no diversion, to get back to --
 Then I'm assuming -- my hypothetical is that California could pass a law that would prevent diversions from occurring.
 Well, in the same way that the Federal Government has had trouble stamping out the marijuana market entirely, I think California is going to have parallel problems in absolutely preventing diversion.
 But just --
 I suppose some -- one answer to that case is the Perez case, with loan sharking.
 Oh, absolutely, Justice Kennedy. And, in that context, what this Court said is, even though it was focused on what was going to be an -- both in that case and generally, an interstate activity, Congress did not have to just look at the particular plaintiff's effect on interstate commerce, but, rather, the effect of the entire class of activities. And if I could --
 But, as Justice O'Connor brought out earlier, all those cases -- Wickard, Perez -- they all involve a commercial enterprise. And, here, we're told this is different, because nobody is buying anything, nobody is selling anything.
 Well, with respect, Justice Ginsburg, I think the whole point of the Wickard case was to extend rationales that it applied previously to commerce to activity that the Court described as economic, but not commercial. And I think the production and distribution and possession of marijuana is economic in the same way that the production of wheat was in the Wickard case.
 But you're -- no, I was going to -- your whole point, I take it, is that the two particular patients in this case are simply -- simply cannot be taken, for our purposes, as representative in the fact that they are getting the marijuana by, I think, growing it themselves or being given it. You're saying, you cannot take that fact as a fact from which to generalize in deciding this case.
 That's exactly right, Justice Souter, and that is the logic, not just of me, but of this Court's cases, in cases like Darby and Wickard and Wirtz and Perez. And I point to the Wickard case, in particular, only because it, too, involves a non-commercial enterprise or a non-commercial production of --
 Well, I do take issue with that. As I read the record in Wickard, it involved a small farmer. A portion of his wheat went on the interstate market. It also was fed to cattle, which, in turn, went on the interstate market. He used some of it himself, but part of it was commercial. I think Wickard can be distinguished on the facts.
 Well, Justice O'Connor, it could be -- I mean, any case can be distinguished on the facts, of course, but I think what's important is, this Court, in Wickard, itself, recognized that the case was -- it was only interesting because a portion of the regulated wheat involved wheat that was going to be consumed on the farm. And --
 The other portion is a matter of [inaudible] interstate commerce.
 Well, that's true, Justice O'Connor, but this Court, basically, in its opinion, Justice Jackson, for the Court, put aside -- to one side all of the grain that was going to go in interstate commerce, since that's easy under our existing precedents. This case is only interesting, he said, because it involves wheat that's going to be consumed on the farm. And he specifically talked about both the wheat that would be fed to the animals, but also the wheat that would be consumed by the family. And what he said is, the intended disposition of the particular wheat wasn't clear from the record of the case. And, by that, I take him to mean that it wasn't relevant to the Court's analysis in upholding the Agricultural Adjustment Act to the wheat at issue there. And it's important to recognize that the way the Agricultural Adjustment Act worked is, it applied to all the wheat that was grown in excess of the quota, and so it applied to the wheat that was used by the family for consumption of their own bread. And, nonetheless, this Court upheld that as a valid Commerce Clause regulation. And so I think, by parity of reasoning, all of the marijuana that's at issue and covered by the Controlled Substances Act, whether it's lawful under state law, whether it's involved in a market transaction or not, is fairly within the Congress' Commerce Clause --
 And is --
 -- authority.
 -- this a harder or easier case than Wickard when we know that, in Wickard, it was lawful to buy and sell wheat, and, here, it is unlawful to buy and sell marijuana?
 Well, Justice Kennedy --
 Does this make your case easier, in a sense, or --
 I think it does, Justice Kennedy, because, as I said earlier, in responding to a question from Justice Scalia, I think if you're talking about a context where Congress has the undoubted power to prohibit something in interstate commerce entirely, and has exercised that power, so it treats something as effectively contraband in interstate commerce, and then takes the complementary step, especially in light of the fungibility of the product, and says, "We're just going to treat this as contraband simpliciter." I think that judgement by Congress has a very definite link to interstate commerce and its unquestioned authority to regulate interstate commerce. And I do think there's a sense in which when Congress is regulating the price of something, there's certainly a temptation to excise out relatively small producers and for Congress to say, "Well, we can still have effective regulation if we regulate the vast majority of production." But with respect to something that's unlawful to have and is -- and has very significant risks precisely because it's unlawful, any little island of lawful possession of non-contraband marijuana, for example, poses a real challenge to the statutory regime. It would also, I think, frustrate Congress' goal in promoting health. And I think the clearest example of that is the fact that, to the extent there is anything beneficial, health-wise, in marijuana, it's THC, which has been isolated and provided in a pill form, and has been available as a Schedule III substance, called --
 But there's --
 -- Marinol.
 -- but there is, in this record, a showing that, for at least one of the two plaintiffs, there were some 30-odd drugs taken, none of them worked. This was the only one that would. And it -- Justice Souter asked you about these two plaintiffs. The law can't be made on the basis of those two plaintiffs. But let's suppose that you're right, generally. If there were to be a prosecution of any of the plaintiffs in this case, would there be any defense, if there were to be a federal prosecution?
 Well, Justice Ginsburg, I think we would take the position, based on our reading of the Oakland Cannabis case -- and, obviously, different justices on this Court read the opinion differently and had different views on the extent to which the medical-necessity defense was foreclosed by that opinion -- I would imagine the Federal Government, in that case, if it took the unlikely step of bringing the prosecution in the first place, would be arguing that, on the authority of Oakland Cannabis, the medical-necessity defense was not available. But I think, in any event, what is important, at this point, is that we don't have a prosecution; we have an affirmative effort to strike down the Controlled Substances Act in an injunctive action. And I think, in that context, certainly Justice Souter is right, that this Court's precedents make clear that one doesn't consider only the individual's conduct, but the entire class of activities that's at issue. I think, in this regard, it's also worth emphasizing that a deeper flaw in the Respondent's argument, that California law is somehow relevant here or the fact that their conduct is lawful under California law, is that there's a mismatch between what California law makes lawful and what might be considered relevant for arguing that there's an attenuated effect on interstate commerce. Because the California law makes the possession of marijuana for medical use lawful under state law, without regard to whether that marijuana has been involved in a cash transaction or has crossed state lines. And so, if Respondents are right on their Commerce Clause theory, I don't see how they can be right because their conduct is lawful under state law or because their -- that marijuana use is medical. If they're right, then I think their analysis would extend to recreational use of marijuana, as well as medical use of marijuana, and would extend to every state in the nation, not just --
 Well, I think --
 -- those states that made it lawful.
 Doesn't it depend on how you define the "relevant class of activities"? Is it the entire class that Congress ought to regulate, or is it a narrower class, in which the Plaintiffs contend that the statute cannot constitutionally be applied to a particular very narrowly defined class? And is it ever permissible to define the class narrowly to escape a -- the broad argument that you make?
 Well, I don't think that is permissible, Justice Stevens. I think that's what this Court's cases in Wirtz, in Darby, in Wickard --
 So you're saying that this statute could never have an unconstitutional application.
 Under the Commerce Clause, I -- that's exactly right, that would be our position. It is constitutional on its face, and it -- and because of that line of authority, an as-applied challenge can be brought, but the legal test that's applied in the as-applied challenge is one that considers the constitutionality of the statute as a whole --
 But, in Morrison, did the Court's opinion not say that Congress cannot justify Commerce Cause -- Clause legislation by using a long but- for causal chain from the activity in question to an impact on interstate commerce? I mean, the Court certainly made that statement.
 Oh, absolutely, Justice O'Connor, but --
 Which cuts against what you're saying.
 Well, with respect, I don't think so. And I'd say two things about it. One, this Court, in Morrison and Lopez, was very important to emphasize -- thought it very important to emphasize two things: one, that the activity there was non-economic in a way that differentiated it, even from Wickard; and, second, the Court also made it clear that the regulation that there -- there was not essential to the effectiveness of an overall regulatory scheme. And I think, on both points, this case is on the constitutional side of the line that separates the Lopez and the Morrison case.
 The argument on the other side is that this limited exception is a non-economic use -- growing for personal use, under prescription --
 I understand that -- I understand that's their argument, Justice O'Connor, but I don't understand how this Court, in Lopez, could have said that Wickard involved non-economic activity if this activity is not also covered. You're talking about --
 Involved economic activity.
 I'm sorry if I misspoke. Economic activity. Because what you're talking about here is the possession, the manufacture, the distribution of a valuable commodity for which there is a ready -- unfortunately, a ready market, albeit an illicit market.
 If we rule for the Respondents in this case, do you think the street price of marijuana would go up or down in California?
 I would be speculating, Justice Kennedy, but I think the price would go down. And I think that what -- and that, in a sense, is consistent with the government's position, which is to say, when the government thinks that something is dangerous, it tries to prohibit it. Part of the effort of prohibiting it is going to lead to a black market, where the prohibition actually would force the price up. And there is a sense in which this regulation, although not primarily designed as a price regulation -- the Controlled Substance Act, I think, does have the effect of increasing the price for marijuana in a way that stamps down demand and limits the -- and in a way that reduces demand. And I think that's all consistent with Congress' judgement here. And if I could return for a second to the point about Marinol, what's important there is that the process of manufacturing of Marinol, and isolating the one helpful component, does two things. One, the manufacturing process allows there to be a safe use for one of the components in marijuana. But it also provides an unambiguous hook for Congress to exercise its Commerce Clause authority. And yet the overall regime of trying to get people to use more healthful substances, and not use things like crude marijuana that have harmful effects, is undermined if Congress can't also address that which is more harmful, but is distinct only because it is capable of being locally produced. And that's exactly what crude marijuana is.
 In other words, the statute is -- it trumps the independent judgement of the physicians who prescribe it for the patients at issue in this case.
 Well, I think, in responding to that, Justice Stevens, I would say, obviously, for purposes of federal law, the idea of medical marijuana is something of an oxymoron, because the Federal Government treats it as a Schedule I substance. Now, notwithstanding that, some doctors may make a different judgement about a particular patient; but that's something that this Court, I think, has previously understood, that the federal regulatory regime does not allow individual patients or doctors to exempt themselves out of that regime.
 Right.
 I think that's the import of the Rutherford decision with Laetrile.
 Do you think there could be any state of facts on which a judicial tribunal could disagree with the finding of Congress that there's no acceptable medical use? Say they had a -- say there was a judicial hearing on which they made a contrary finding. Would we have to ignore that? Would we have to follow the congressional finding or the judicial finding if that happened?
 Well, it depends on the exact hypothetical you have in mind. I think the -- the judicial finding that I think would be appropriate, and this Court would not have to ignore in any way, is a finding by the D.C. Circuit that, in a particular case where there's a rescheduling effort before the FDA, that the underlying judgement of the FDA refusing to reschedule is invalid, arbitrary, capricious. That's the way to go after the finding that marijuana is a Schedule I substance without a valid medical use in treatment. This is not a situation in -- and your hypothetical might respond to a different statute that raised a harder question, where Congress made such a medical finding, and then just left it there without any mechanism to adjust the finding for changing realities. But, here, Congress made it clear that a process remains open to reschedule marijuana in a way that gets it onto Schedule II or Schedule III. And I think it's wrong to assume that there's any inherent hostility to the substances at issue here. I mean, the FDA, for example, rescheduled Marinol from Schedule II to Schedule III in a way that had the effect of making it easier to prescribe and more available. But I think what's going on with the FDA is an effort to try to counterbalance the risk for abuse, the risk for diversion, with these other considerations of getting safe medicine --
 Have there --
 -- available to patients --
 -- have there been any applications to change the schedule for marijuana to the FDA?
 There have been a number of those petitions that have been filed. There was one recently rejected, I think as recently as 2001; it may be 1999. There was also a series of, kind of, a four- or five-iteration effort to change the rescheduling that culminated in a D.C. Circuit opinion in the early '90s. So there's definitely been these efforts. But on the current state of the -- of the record, there just is not a justification for changing the schedule. And I think both of the briefs talked a little bit about the Institute of Medicine's study about the medical efficacy of marijuana. And I think one thing that's important to keep in mind that that study comes to a conclusion about is, whatever benefits there may be for the individual components in marijuana, that smoked -- smoked marijuana itself really doesn't have any future as medicine, because -- and that's true, I think, for two reasons. One, there's something like 400 different chemical components in crude marijuana that one would smoke, and it's -- it just, sort of, belies any logic that all 400 of those would be helpful. And a big part of the process of medicine, generally, is to take raw, crude material that somebody could grow in their garden, and actually have people who do this for a living get involved in a process of synthesizing and isolating the beneficial components, and then manufacturing and making that available. The second reason that smoked marijuana doesn't have much of a future as medicine is, as I think people understand, smoking is harmful; and that's true of tobacco, but it's also true of marijuana. And so the idea that smoked marijuana would be an effective delivery device for medicine, I think, is also something that really doesn't have any future as medicine. What does have a future for medicine, of course, is an effort to synthesize and isolate the beneficial component. That's been done with Marinol. It is true that some people have difficulty tolerating the pill form that Marinol is available in. And there's ongoing research to try to figure out different ways to deliver that substance. But there is, in a sense, a little bit of a -- and the Institute of Medicine's study has about five pages discussing Marinol, and it makes the point that there's something of a tradeoff. Because one of the downsides of Marinol, as opposed to marijuana, is that it takes longer to get into the bloodstream. But that's also one of the reasons why the FDA has made a judgement that Marinol is less subject to abuse, because it takes longer to get into the drug-stream, and so it doesn't have the characteristic of street drugs that tend to be abused, which is a very quick delivery time between the taking of the substance and the time that it has an effect on the system.
 May I go back to your point a few minutes ago about -- it was, sort of, a categoric point -- you, in effect, said, "If this argument succeeds with respect to medical use of marijuana, the next argument is going to be recreational use, and there's no real way to distinguish between them." Wouldn't this be a way to distinguish between them? That in deciding what class you are going to -- or what subclass you're going to consider from which to generalize, you simply ask the question, "What good reasons are there to define a subclass this way?" In this particular case, the good reasons to define a subclass of medical usage are the benefits -- whether you accept the evidence is another thing -- but the benefits which the doctors say that, under present circumstances, you can get from smoking it, as opposed to taking the synthesized drug. There's no such argument, I would guess, in favor of recreational marijuana usage as a separate category. And, for that reason, isn't there a -- isn't there a good reason to categorize this as narrowly as the Respondents are doing here, just medical usage, without any risk of generalizing to recreational usage?
 With respect, Justice Souter, I don't think that it would be a good idea for this Court to get on a path of starting to second-guess Congress' judgement about defining a class of activities --
 That may -- oh, that may be, but it seems to me that that's a separate argument, because you're -- you were arguing before that if you recognize medical usage, you don't have any way of drawing the line against private recreational usage. And I'm suggesting that you do have a reason for drawing that line, and it's the benefit for medical usage, if you accept the evidence; whereas, there is no reason to categorize recreational usage separately, and that seems to me a category argument, rather than a respect-for-Congress argument.
 Well, Justice Souter, I have no doubt that this Court could draw a line. I think it would find it very difficult to police that line over the broad variety of cases. I think it would find it every bit as frustrating as policing the line in Hammer against Dagenhart that this Court abandoned in Darby. With that, I'd like to reserve my time for rebuttal.
 Mr. Barnett.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: I have two points to make. First, the class of activities involved in this case are non-economic and wholly intrastate. Second, the federal prohibition of this class of activities it not essential -- is not an essential part of a larger regulatory scheme that would be undercut unless the intrastate activity were regulated. If you accept the government's contrary contentions on either of these two points, Ashcroft v. Raich will replace Wickard v. Filburn as the most far-reaching example of Commerce Clause authority over intrastate activity.
 Well, on your first point, can't we infer from the fact that there's an enormous market, commercial market, for any given commodity, that simple possession of that commodity is a form of participation in the market?
 It can be, or it might not be. If you possess an item that came from the market or is going to the market, simple possession could easily be a part of the marketplace. But if you're in possession of an item that you've made, yourself, that is disconnected from the market -- it didn't come from the market and it's not going to the market --
 Well, but it's fungible.
 That -- the fungibility issue is in this case, but the -- but a -- the fact that a good is fungible does not make it a market good, and it does not make the possession of that good an economic activity. Or --
 Well, you know, Congress has applied this theory in other contexts. One is the protection of endangered species. Congress has made it unlawful to possess ivory, for example. It doesn't matter whether you got it lawfully, or not; or eagle feathers, the mere possession of it, whether you got it through interstate commerce or not. And Congress' reasoning is, "We can't tell whether it came through interstate commerce or not, and to try to prove that is just beyond our ability; and, therefore, it is unlawful to possess it, period." Now, are those -- are those laws, likewise, unconstitutional, as going beyond Congress' commerce power?
 Not if they're an essential part of a larger regulatory scheme that would be undercut, unless those activities are reached.
 Well, why is that different from this?
 Because this class of activities -- because it's been isolated by the State of California, and is policed by the State of California, so that it's entirely separated from the market --
 Isolated and -- I understand that there are some communes that grow marijuana for the medical use of all of the members of the communes.
 That class of activities is not before the Court. That is actually before --
 No, but it's before the Court when you -- when you raise the policing of the problem by California, and saying it's not a -- it's not a real problem, you brought it before the Court.
 But that class of activities could be -- could be -- if this Court limits its ruling to the class of activities that is before the Court, that class --
 Which is -- which is what?
 Which is --
 An individual grower?
 An individual who is growing it for her -- him- or herself, who has -- or has a caregiver growing it for her --
 Gee, what basis --
 -- for --
 -- what basis is there to draw it that narrowly? I mean, I guess if we -- we could say people whose last name begins with a Z. You know, that would narrow the category, too. But why does -- why does that make any sense?
 Justice Scalia, we believe it makes sense because we are talking about a classification of activities that has been identified by the State of California, and which is rational to distinguish from --
 Oh, but California hasn't identified individual growers. Communes are okay, as far as California law is concerned.
 Well, it's not entirely clear whether communes are okay, as far as the California laws are concerned.
 Why wouldn't it be?
 Because if, in fact, commercial activity is taking place, if buying and selling is taking place --
 No, no, they're not buying and selling. I mean, you can't prove they're buying and selling. There are just a whole lot of people there, with alleged medical needs.
 I mean, I don't understand. Is there any authority in the commerce cases for -- an X, which is there in the middle of a state, and it doesn't move one way or the other -- now, Congress' power does extend to the X if the state doesn't say something about the X. But if the state says something about the X, then Congress' power does not extend to it. That's hard for me to accept, because I don't see -- whether it's commerce or not commerce, whether it affects something or doesn't affect something, doesn't seem to me to have much to do with whether the state separately regulates it, and I can't find any support at all for that in any case.
 The support would come from the exception to Lopez and Morrison that the government is urging that the Court adopt, that the Congress can reach non-economic activity that's intrastate, that's wholly intrastate, if doing so is essential to a larger regulatory scheme that would be undercut if they can't reach it.
 Well, here, they say -- look, I take it you're using this because I was going to ask you. You know, he grows heroin, cocaine, tomatoes that are going to have genomes in them that could, at some point, lead to tomato children that will eventually affect Boston. You know, we can -- oil that's never, in fact, being used, but we want an inventory of it, federally. You know, I can multiply the examples --
 Well --
 -- and you can, too. So you're going to get around all those examples by saying what?
 By saying that it's all going to depend on the regulatory scheme, what the --
 Yeah.
 -- purpose of the --
 So now what you're saying is, in a Commerce Clause case, what we're supposed to do is to start to look at the federal scheme and the state scheme and see, comparing the federal scheme and the state scheme, whether, given the state scheme, the federal scheme is really necessary to include this. That's a task, and I'm trying to make it as complicated as I can in my question. [Laughter.]
 But I see it very well. Here is what they say. They say that, "By the way, a hundred-thousand people using medical marijuana in California will lead to lower marijuana prices in the nation. Bad. And, second, when we see medical marijuana in California, we won't know what it is. Everybody'll say, 'Mine is medical.' Certificates will circulate on the black market. We face a mess. For both those reasons, it does have an impact," they say. Now, what's your response?
 Well, you've raised at least two different practical issues. One is the fact -- the number of people who are in the class, and the second is the ability to identify whether they properly belong in the class. As for the number of people, we are talking about a very small number of people. They say a hundred-thousand. They get their figures from the National Organization from Reform of Marijuana Laws. Our figures in our brief come from the government. The figures show it's a very small fraction of persons that would be involved. And their argument is basically -- and the logic of your hypothetical is premised on -- the more people that go into the illicit market, the better for federal drug policy, because that will drive the price up. You have to -- what we're take -- we're doing is, we're taking people out of the illicit drug market, which then, under your hypothetical, would lead to a reduction -- and Justice Kennedy's suggestion -- would lead to a reduction in the price of the illegal market, which, the opposite would be, they're -- it's good for federal policy to have more people in the illicit drug market, because that's going to drive the price up.
 No, no, we don't want more people --
 Of course not.
 -- in the illicit drug market. [Laughter.]
 Of course not.
 And we don't want low prices, either. [Laughter.]
 But the -- but the -- but the scheme of -- but the class of activities that have been authorized by the State of California will take people out of --
 So, normally I would have said, it's up to Congress to figure out how to -- the way that -- you have one going one way, one going the other way, and balancing those factors would be for Congress. That's what we'd normally say.
 Well --
 And you say all that stuff is not for Congress; that's for us.
 Well, within this exception -- the threshold issue -- I do want to make sure that I focus on this -- the threshold issue, which is the issue that has occupied most of our time so far, is whether the activity here is economic or non-economic. The government claims it's economic, we claim it's non-economic.
 Well, what it is, is, it's non-economic, and it affects the economic.
 Right. So the threshold issue that is -- that -- upon which Lopez and Morrison terms -- turns is whether it's economic or non-economic.
 Well, I should have thought that regular household chores of -- say, performed in an earlier time mostly by women, was classically economic -- washing dishes, making bread. And now you say growing marijuana isn't?
 If you accept the government's definition of economic, then every -- then washing dishes, today, would be economic, and that --
 No, but even --
 -- would be within the -- within the power of Congress to reach.
 But even if we accept your definition of economic, I don't see that it is a basis upon which we ought to make a category decision. You say it's non-economic because one of these people is a -- is a self-grower, another one is getting it from a friend for nothing. But I don't see what reason that you have given, or any reason that you haven't given, for us to believe that, out of -- now I'm going to assume, for the sake of argument, a hundred-thousand potential users -- everybody is going to get it from a friend or from plants in the backyard. Seems to me the sensible assumption is, they're going to get it on the street. And once they get it, under California law, it's not a crime for them to have it and use it. But they're going to get it in the street. Why isn't that the sensible assumption?
 Well, they have an -- they have a very strong incentive not to get it on the street, because getting it on the street is going to subject them to criminal prosecution, under both California and federal law, as well as the --
 Yeah, but the -- it's also the case that approximately 10 percent of the American population is doing that every day, if I accept the figures in the government's brief, and they're not getting prosecuted.
 But we're talking -- in that case, we're talking about people who are using it for sport, for recreation. We are talking about a class of people here who are sick people, who don't necessarily want to violate the law.
 And if I am a sick person, I'm going to say, "Look, if they're not prosecuting every kid who buys, what, a nickel bag or whatever you call a small quantity today, they're not going to prosecute me, either." I mean, there's not going to be any incentive, it seems to me, to avoid the street market.
 The government, in their brief, asserts that the -- that the possession statute that currently exists provides a deterrent effect, which is why they -- which is their explanation for why they failed to enforce the possession statute that they say is so essential to the --
 If one --
 -- regulatory scheme.
 -- if one takes your view, that this is non-economic activity, so it's outside Congress' commerce power, then explain to me why, if you have someone similarly situated in a neighboring state, somebody whose doctor says, "This person needs marijuana to live," but that state doesn't have a Compassionate-Use Act -- it's just as isolated -- no purchase, no sale, grown at home, good friend grows it -- and yet you say Congress could regulate that, if I understand your brief properly.
 Yes, Your -- yes, Your Honor, because there's the -- that's the second step of the analysis. The first step of the analysis is the economic/non-economic. If you don't -- if the Court stops there, then they could also apply in these other states. But then if the Court adopts --
 But if you -- if you buy that -- so your first answer is, yes, on your first argument, it would be equally impermissible for the feds to regulate medical use anywhere.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 All right. Now you're going to have some limiting --
 But a limiting principle is the one that I -- was identified by the Court in Lopez in which the government is asserting that if it's an essential part of a broader regulation of economic activity to reach this activity, then it may be reached. And the difference between states in which there is a state law enforcement that's confining the class, and that there is a discrimination between legal and non-legal use, is completely different from a practical enforcement standpoint than a state in which there is no differentiation. Just think of the existence, for example, of identification cards, which the State of California is going to be issuing, like driver's license cards.
 Yeah, but it doesn't right now, and that doesn't make the scheme less valid, in your view.
 Well, because -- but this is the sort of regulation -- the sort of effectiveness of the regulation that will be at issue and which is, in fact -- I believe the Court should be in the position of trusting the State of California to be able to administer its regime. There is no regime in other states to trust, and, therefore, the argument that it is necessary to reach that activity, and a lot of other activity in states in which the states are not attempting to pursue the health of their citizens -- the goal of preserving the health of their citizens this way, that would fall under the exception which this Court suggested in Lopez --
 This is a new framework, I take it, and it's very interesting. And one of the things that interests me -- I guess, on your framework, Lopez should have come out my way. [Laughter.]
 Well --
 It's essential to regulate guns in schools as part of a national gun-control regulatory scheme.
 Justice Breyer, that's the reason why that exception has to be narrowly treated, so it doesn't reach your result. [Laughter.]
 If that exception were treated as broadly as you suggested that it should be in your dissent in Morrison, then the game is up, the exception will swallow the rule, and Lopez and Morrison will be limited to their facts.
 I thought we didn't need to reach all that here, for the reason that the connection here, which is an enforcement-related connection and a market-related connection, is actually, I have to confess, a little more obvious and a little more close than what I had to -- what I had to say in Lopez to -- was the connection between guns, education, communities, and business. So I would have thought, given the -- and I believe that, you know -- but, I mean -- but that was far further than this, which is just direct.
 But this case is completely unlike those cases. This case is completely isolated. In Lopez, that gun probably did come through interstate commerce, not that I believe it should have made any difference, but it probably did. Here, we're talking about substances that don't. So there's just no literal connection between this class of activities and this interstate market.
 Well, we didn't decide that, in Lopez, on the basis of whether the gun had come in interstate commerce. If the statute in question had applied only to guns that had been transported in interstate commerce, the case might have come out differently.
 I -- no doubt, Your -- I -- and I wasn't suggesting otherwise, Justice Scalia. I'm just suggesting that, here, we have -- exactly, that if there had been that interstate connection in Lopez, the case might have come out different. There is no interstate connection whatsoever in this class of cases. None. The only way to make it an interstate connection is through some sort of hypothetical economic substitution effect in which somebody who's doing something over here is going to have an affect on somebody else who's doing something over there. There is no connection.
 Sounds like Wickard to me.
 Well, Wickard, Your Honor --
 I always used to laugh at Wickard, but that's -- that's what Wickard said.
 Wickard --
 Had he not eaten the wheat, it would have been in interstate commerce.
 Had that case been about eating wheat, that case would never have arisen.
 Well, that's what it was about, as far as the Court's analysis was concerned. To be sure, there were a lot of -- there was a lot more use of the wheat on his farm, other than just human consumption, but it seems to me the analysis of the case said, "You take it -- you take it out of the stream of commerce by growing it yourself, you make it unnecessary for your -- to buy it in interstate commerce."
 It's -- the entire analysis -- the entire proof that the court relied upon in Wickard was proof of the economic impact of home-consumed wheat on the farms. And by "home-consumed," it did not mean eating at the family -- at the family table; it meant feeding to your livestock and then putting it -- your livestock --
 Strange phrase, to mean "feeding to livestock"?
 But the --
 "Home-consumed" is feed it to your pig?
 But, yes, that's exactly what --
 I don't think so.
 -- that's exactly what that general term -- how that general term was used in this case.
 But what the Court said, I take it -- and I have quoted a lot of the language there -- it says that the wheat farmer's consumption of home-grown wheat, not the part that went in -- quote, "though it may not be regarded as commerce" --
 Yes, Your Honor.
 -- end quote, still can be regulated, quote, "whatever its nature," so long as, quote, "it exerts a substantial economic effect on interstate commerce." Now, that's the language, and I take it that Justice Scalia is exactly right, I thought, from that language, it's about the analysis, home-grown wheat, which is not economic, having an effect on something that is.
 With all respect --
 Which is not commerce. Sorry, not commerce.
 With all respect, what -- that's -- I was about to make that --
 Well, the Commerce Clause speaks in terms of commerce.
 Right. Right. What the Court was using here was the narrower -- the traditional definition of "commerce" that Justice Thomas has been urging this Court to adopt. And they were saying that, "We are not going to limit ourselves to that narrow definition of 'commerce.'" It would include, for example, agriculture and production. That's all going to be reachable, even though it's not commerce, in the traditional sense. But what we would call it today, and I believe what the Court correctly called it, in Lopez, was "economic activity." Production is economic activity. Manufacturing is economic activity. But -- it's not commerce, but it's economic activity that can be reached. And that is the activity -- that's not only the activity that Farmer Filburn was engaged in; that was the activity that the statute was aimed at. The statute --
 Well, why is this not economic activity, if you use the term in that broad sense? This marijuana that is grown, just like the wheat that was grown, in Wickard, since it's grown on the farm, doesn't have to be bought elsewhere, and that makes it an economic activity.
 What made it an economic activity in Wickard was the fact that it was part of commercial enterprise, that it was being used on the farm -- not in interstate commerce, but part of the commercial enterprise of the farm.
 Again, I don't think that's -- that faithfully represents what the opinion said. I think the opinion covered -- including the amount that he consumed himself, and his family consumed.
 The -- look, I -- for whatever it's worth, it's worth remembering that the statute exempted small commercial farms. People who had backyard gardens weren't even included within the regulatory regime. The regulatory regime was about regulating or stopping or restricting the supply of wheat that got into the market, or that could have --
 Did the opinion make a point of that?
 Pardon me?
 Did the opinion make a point of that?
 It -- it was mentioned in the opinion. It was not -- it was not a major point of this opinion. But --
 I don't think it was a point of the Court's analysis at all.
 This --
 Could I -- could I --
 Could I ask this question. What is your view with respect to the impact of the activities concerned in this case on the interstate market for marijuana? Is it your view that it will have no impact, that it will increase the interstate demand, or decrease the interstate demand? So there are three alternatives. Which is the one we should follow?
 Can I pick "trivial impact"? [Laughter.]
 No, but if it -- "trivial impact," is it a trivial impact that enhances the price of marijuana or decreases the price of marijuana, in your view?
 The only effect it could have on the price would be a slight trivial reduction, if it has any effect at all, because it's going to withdraw users from the illicit drug market. And to the extent that they are now in the illicit drug market -- and we don't know whether they are or not --
 Well, that would reduce demand and increase price, it seems to me. It's the other way around.
 Well, it would reduce demand and reduce prices, I think. But --
 If you reduce demand, you reduce prices? Are you sure?
 Yes. [Laughter.]
 Oh, you're right. You're right. Okay. Yeah. Yeah.
 Your whole argument for triviality, though, goes -- your whole argument for triviality, though, goes back to your disagreement with the government about how many people are involved, because I take it you accept the assumption that the more people who are involved -- if there are millions and millions, it is unlikely that this licensed activity is going to be without an effect on the market. So the whole argument boils down to how many people are going to be involved. You don't accept the government's 100,000-dollar figure. Let me ask you a question that would -- that would get to, maybe, a different number, and that is, do you know how many people there are in California who are undergoing chemotherapy at any given time?
 I do not know the answer to that.
 Isn't that number going to be indicative of the demand for marijuana?
 It could be, Your Honor, but that also illustrates --
 But if you -- if you accept that, then there's nothing implausible about the government's hundred-thousand number, is there?
 But whatever -- I don't know, because I don't know the number of people using chemotherapy. But whatever the number --
 How many people are there in California? What's the population?
 Thirty-four million.
 Thank you, Justice Kennedy.
 Lots -- lots -- [Laughter.]
 -- lots and lots. They -- a hundred-thousand cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy does not seem like an implausible number. And, in fact, if that number is a plausible one today, its plausibility reflects, among other things, the fact that there is a controversy as to whether California's law, in fact, is enforceable, or not. And the reason -- there is reason to assume that -- if we ruled your way, that that number would go up. So, if you accept that line of argument, then your argument, that the effect, whatever it may be, is going to be trivial, seems to me unsupportable. Am I missing something?
 Well, two things. First of all, whatever number it is, it's going to be confined to people who are sick, who are sick enough to use this. That is not an infinitely expandable number, the way, for example, recreational activity is, where lots of people could just decide to do it. We're talking about people who qualify, on a physician's recommendation, for this particular activity. That will limit the number. But the amount of the people -- the effect on commerce only matters if the Wickard v. Filburn aggregation principle applies to the class of activities in this case, and it does not apply to the class of activities in this case if they are non-economic, as we assert that they are.
 Well -- but that is circular reasoning, because the whole -- your whole argument that it's non-economic is based on the claim that there are -- the numbers are so few -- the number of people involved, from what you could generalize, are so few that it would not be reasonable to infer an effect on the market. If there would be a large market effect, it makes no more sense to call this non-economic than Filburn's use, non-economic.
 Lopez and Morrison stand for the proposition that activities that simply have an effect on the market are not necessary -- that does not make them economic. This Court rejected that proposition, that just because an activity has an effect -- an economic effect makes the activity, itself, economic. It adopted a principle that's less than --
 Remote, remote, remote economic effect.
 It was inference upon inference upon inference. That's not what we're talking about here.
 But just -- just have it -- just -- whether an activity is economic, you have to look to the activity, itself, and an economic activity is one that's associated with sale, exchange, barter, the production of things for sale and exchange, barter. This whole Court's jurisprudence since The New Deal has been premised on the ability to tell the difference between economic activity, on the one hand, and personal liberty, on the other.
 But your whole jurisprudence in this case is premised on the assumption that we have got to identify the entire range of potential effect based on the particular character of two individuals in their -- in their supply of marijuana. And the whole point of this argument is that that does not seem to be a realistic premise on which to base constitutional law.
 The premise of our -- the premise of our economic claim is the nature of the activity involved, not necessarily its effect, but the kind of activity it is. The idea -- for example, you -- prostitution is an economic activity. Marital relations is not an economic activity. We could be talking about virtually the same act. And there is a market overhang for -- from private sexual relations to prostitution, but we don't say that because there is a market for prostitution, that, therefore, everything that is not in that market is economic. We look at the activities, and we --
 I'd like to ask you one question about the activity --
 Yes.
 -- which was brought up before, and I just -- I've never understood this. I'm not an expert. I don't honestly know, if I really think about it, despite all the papers and so forth, whether it's true that medical marijuana is helpful to people in ways that pills are not. I really don't know. So I would have thought that the people, like your clients, who have a strong view about it, would go to the FDA, and they would say to the FDA, "FDA, take this off the list. You must take it off the list if it has an accepted medical use and it isn't lacking in safety." The FDA will say yes or it will say no. If it says yes, they win. If they say no, they can come right into court and say, "That's an abuse of discretion." The Court says yes or no. If it says yes, they win. If it says no, it must be because it wasn't an abuse of discretion, in which case, I, as a judge, and probably as a person, would think it isn't true that marijuana has some kind of special use. So that would seem to me to be the obvious way to get what they want. That seems to me to be relevant to the correct characterization. And while the FDA can make mistakes, I guess medicine by regulation is better than medicine by referendum.
 Well --
 So that's -- I just want to know why.
 Well, Your Honor, first of all, that whole process wouldn't dictate what the power of Congress is to reach this activity --
 That's all true, but as long as that hasn't been done, don't I have to take this case on the assumption that there is no such thing as medical marijuana that's special and necessary?
 I would --
 If has been done, maybe I shouldn't make it.
 -- I would simply ask Your Honor to read the amicus brief by Rick Doblin, in which it describes the government's obstruction of scientific research that would establish the safety and efficacy of cannabis by denying supplies of cannabis -- of medical -- of cannabis for medical experimentation. And then I'd ask Your Honor to read the Institute for Medicine's report, that both the government and I -- and we have relied upon in our briefs. There has been no impeachment of this report by the National Academy of Sciences on the medical effect. And what they say is that the -- that what information we have is that cannabis does have a substantial medical effect. Smoked cannabis does carry with it harms associated with it, as the -- as General Clement correctly pointed out. It does carry with it these ancillary harms. But when people are sick and people are suffering and people are dying, they may be willing to run the risk of these long-term harms in order to get the immediate relief, the life-saving relief that cannabis has demonstrably been able to provide. I'd just ask Your Honor to look at that, which is in the record.
 Are prescriptions, under California law, limited only to those people with life-threatening illnesses?
 They are limited to a list of illnesses that are in the statute.
 Some of the illnesses --
 Some of which are life-threatening and some of which are not, Your Honor.
 In one -- in one plaintiff's case, I think, there isn't a life-threatening --
 That's correct, Your Honor. She has -- she has severe back spasms and pain that cannot be controlled by conventional medicines. She's a law-abiding citizen. This goes back to the issue of what the -- incentives there are that are created by this. This is a law-abiding woman, who has never been interested in the illicit-drugs market.
 May I just ask you one procedural question?
 Yes.
 And this is -- this is a suit for an injunction. And it -- basically an injunction against a criminal prosecution.
 And seizure --
 And --
 -- of these plants.
 -- and there's an old saying, in equity, that courts don't enjoin criminal prosecutions. So how is your injunction suit appropriate, given that old saying meant that you have to make your defense in the criminal proceeding and not enjoin this operation?
 Well, it is -- it is an -- we're seeking an injunction to prevent the enforcement of the statute against these two persons, which includes forfeiture, which has already happened in this case. We've already had Diane Monson's plants seized by the Drug Enforcement Authority. That is not something that we -- that we -- that has anything to do with criminal prosecution, and yet that puts at risk her supply of medicine, the supply of medicine she needs to get by, to relieve her suffering. I see my time is up. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Barnett. General Clement, you have four minutes.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: As I understand Respondents' position, it's effectively that their clients, and clients like them, in their use of medical marijuana, is somehow so hermetically sealed from the rest of the market on marijuana that it has no effect on that market on marijuana and no effect on the government's overall regulatory regime. And I understand that to be true largely because of state law. And one of the many problems with that mode of analysis is that the state law is not designed only to carve out those transactions that have no effect on interstate commerce or no effect on the federal regulatory regime. Proposition 215 was not passed as an exercise in cooperative federalism; it was passed as an effort to make medical marijuana lawful to possess, whether you bought it in interstate commerce, whether you bought it with the marijuana having traveled in interstate commerce, whether you bought it, whether you grew it yourself. There's a fundamental mismatch with their theory that really, I think, undermines their theory. Now, there's the question now about what kind of impact this would have on the federal enforcement scheme. Now, we, in our reply brief, try to use the numbers from one of Respondents' own amici, and we suggest that there's a hundred-thousand people that might be lawful medical users, if their position prevails. Now, obviously, this is all an effort in, sort of, counter-factual speculation, so the numbers may be a bit off. But they suggest that our own government numbers are somehow better, and they cite them on page 18 of the red brief. But the only numbers on the red brief for California suggest that, in the four counties for which there are data, there was -- .5 percent of the people use marijuana. Now, if you extend that out statewide to the 34 million people in California, that gives you 170,000 people. So their numbers -- using the government numbers actually give you more potentially affected people. I think in trying to figure out how many people would be affected, it's worth considering what medical conditions are covered. And this responds to Justice Kennedy's last question, Is this just limited to AIDS or people with terminal cancer? And it's not. And if you want to look at what is covered as a serious medical condition under the statute, you can turn to page 7(a) of the red brief, in the appendix to the red brief, and it suggests that a serious medical condition -- there's a catchall at the end that includes subsection 12 -- "Any other chronic or persistent medical system that, if not alleviated, may cause serious harm to the patient's safety or physical or mental health." Now, I think that is an exceedingly broad definition of a serious medical condition for which somebody could be -- get a recommendation for marijuana for medical uses. Another point worth considering, in considering the impact on the federal regulatory regime or the effectiveness of California in preventing any diversion, is to take a look at two cases we cite in our reply brief. One is the People against Wright. There's somebody who's arrested with 19 ounces, over a pound, of marijuana. They're packaged such that he has one small bag in his pocket, six other small bags wrapped with a scale in his backpack, two other larger bags in that backpack, and then a pound wrapped in a shirt in the back of his truck. And yet the Appellate Court in California said that he was entitled to go to the jury with the theory that that was for medical use. The fact that he had a scale, and the fact that it was packaged the way it was, could be explained to the jury because he had just boughten it, and that he used the scale to make sure he wasn't ripped-off. I think that shows that it's going to be very hard to enforce the regulatory regime. The other case in the reply brief worth mentioning is the Santa Cruz case, because that's a case where a Federal District Court, after Raich came out, said that it could not enforce the DA and the Controlled Substances Act against a 250-person cooperative. And that just shows that this is not something that will be limited to one or two users at a time, but will have a substantial impact on the government's ability to enforce the Controlled Substances Act. Thank you.
 Thank you, General Clement. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument now in No. 03-1488, Ulysses Tory v. Johnnie L. Cochran. Mr. Chemerinsky.
 Good morning. Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: The injunction in this case violates the most basic principles of the First Amendment. It's a prior restraint. It's a content-based restriction on speech. It's vastly overbroad. It even restricts the speech of those who are not a party to the lawsuit, such as Petitioner Ruth Craft. The injunction in this case is inconsistent with this country's unique and profound commitment that speech by public officials and public figures be open, robust, and uninhibited. One way in which the injunction is clearly unconstitutional is in restricting the speech of those who are not a party to the lawsuit. For example, Ruth Craft is expressly restrained from ever speaking again about Johnnie Cochran even though she was never named as a party to the lawsuit. And, in fact, Cochran's attorney admitted at the beginning of trial, she wasn't a part of the lawsuit.
 How about you? You're in trouble too, aren't you? (Laughter.)
 Yes, I am, Your Honor. This injunction is so broad that if I talk about Johnnie Cochran or this case on the sidewalk in front of this Court or pass out copies of the brief or speak to any reporter, I am violating the terms of the injunction and I could be held in contempt of court.
 Mr. Chemerinsky, you speak about the injunction, and the injunction has three parts. I thought that you were not challenging -- at least the question presented doesn't suggest you're challenging -- the first one that concerns distance, the 300 yard from Cochran or his place of business, and the third one, which is an anti-harassment provision. Do I understand correctly that it is only the second one that you're challenging?
 No, Your Honor. The question presented is that the injunction is unconstitutional. One of the reasons why the injunction is unconstitutional is that it's based on speech that's protected by the First Amendment. All of the statements that were uttered by Mr. Tory are opinion protected by the First Amendment. There is not the requisite actual malice. And so it's our position that the injunction itself is unconstitutional.
 But your question is preventing all future speech about an admitted public figure, and the first and third provisions of this injunction do not prohibit all future speech.
 Yes, Your Honor, that's correct. It's our position, though, that the injunction is based on speech that's protected by the First Amendment, and we believe that the question presented is that the injunction is impermissible in its restriction of speech.
 But that isn't what you've said in the question presented. Why shouldn't we be limited to answering the question presented? And that would leave the other parts there.
 Well, of course, you're limited to the question presented. Our position, though, is that the injunction in its restriction of speech is unconstitutional. And one of the reasons why the injunction is unconstitutional is that all of the speech that occurred in this case is speech that's protected by the First Amendment.
 Yes, but you understand Justice Ginsburg's question surely, and I would imagine that even if you prevail, nothing we would order would affect the first and third parts.
 Well, Your Honor, certainly we believe that the injunction is most clearly unconstitutional in its overbreadth. We believe also and separately the injunction is unconstitutional because injunctions are not a permissible remedy in a defamation case, especially concerning public officials and public figures. But it's also our position that the injunction is based on speech that's protected by the First Amendment, and thus, the injunction violates the First Amendment.
 Well, but that doesn't --
 Mr. Chemerinsky, is it true that your client intends to go on defaming Mr. Cochran?
 No, Your Honor. We don't believe our client has ever defamed Mr. Cochran. We believe that all of his speech is just opinion.
 Does he intend to continue making the same comments that he made before?
 His exact words were that perhaps he would continue to express his view that Mr. Cochran owes him money.
 All right. Now, let me ask you this. Under your theory, if -- if the defendant is judgment-proof, does respondent have any remedy at all if the statements are defamatory?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 What is it?
 There is, of course, a remedy. Since we're dealing here with a public figure, there is the remedy of expressing views which this Court has said in Gertz v. Welch is available to a public figure. There is a damage judgment that's available. Certainly, Your Honor, there can't be a different rule --
 But if -- if the defendant is judgment-proof, what good does that do?
 Your Honor, there is a damage judgment that forever would be available against the person. And it cannot be, Your Honor, that those who are poor will have injunctions --
 Well -- well, your -- your answer should be to Justice O'Connor there is no effective legal remedy under your theory of the case.
 No, Your Honor, I disagree with that.
 I mean, you -- you say he has the remedy of -- of counter-speech. We're talking -- that's really that doesn't answer the question. The question is, is there anything he can get from the courts other than a damage remedy, and your answer I think is no.
 That's correct, Your Honor. From the courts, he can get a damage remedy but I don't accept that a damage remedy is inadequate just because a person may be poor. The damage remedy will be that they'd be collected for the person who gets assets in the future. Also, as I was saying to Justice O'Connor, it can't be --
 Well, it -- it seems to me that that really avoids the problem -- the problem. So suppose we disagree with you about that. Then it's true that there is no -- there is no legal remedy that he can get.
 But then, Justice Kennedy, it can't be the rule that poor people have their speech enjoined, but those with assets can continue to speak in the future.
 Well, it also can't be the rule that poor people can defame ad libitum and -- and people who have money cannot. I mean, that's -- that's not a fair rule either.
 No, Your Honor, but that's why there would be, of course, the ability of a court to issue a damage judgment. There are many instances in which damage judgments can't be collected.
 It's worthless against a -- against a person who has no assets.
 But that's true everywhere in the legal system, Your Honor. And I would also argue here that none of Mr. Tory's statements were defamatory. I would point --
 Now that's another one that is in your brief. You say that these were statements of opinion not fact. But that surely is not presented in your question. You -- you don't -- there were findings made that these statements were defamatory, and your question presented does not seem to me to encompass at all the question whether these statements were defamatory.
 I would disagree, Your Honor. The question presented is whether this injunction, that forever stops speech, violates the First Amendment. One reason why --
 Not -- not this injunction. The question presented is whether a permanent injunction as a remedy in a defamation -- in a defamation action, preventing all future speech about an admitted public figure, violates the First Amendment. There's no suggestion in that that you claim that in this particular case there was no defamation. I -- I just don't think it's fairly included within the question.
 Your Honor, what I am saying is that the question presented does ask whether this injunction, which permanently restricts speech --
 No, it doesn't. It says whether a permanent injunction as a remedy in a defamation action preventing all future speech about an admitted public figure violates the First Amendment.
 We would argue --
 There's nothing about this particular injunction which is based upon speech that is not defamation. There's nothing in there about that.
 Your Honor, our position is that question asks whether an injunction violates the First Amendment, and certainly it is about this case. And our position is that all of the speech that was expressed in this case is opinion. And it's important --
 All right. Now, if that's so --
 Well -- well, there really -- there are findings against you, and to say that a lawyer is a crook, a liar, and a thief and you're trying to tell us that that's not defamatory, I mean, I -- I think we should just proceed on -- on some other basis for this argument. We have other questions to discuss.
 Sure. But, Your Honor, I want to just respond to that. The exact statement there was -- and I'll quote it for you and it is on page 54 of the joint appendix. Johnnie is a crook, a liar, and a thief. Can a lawyer go to heaven? Luke 11:46. Your Honor, this Court has said, for example, in Greenbelt Cooperative that charging somebody with blackmail is expressing opinion. In Letter Carriers v. Austin this Court said calling somebody a traitor is opinion.
 All right. That -- that -- what you've quoted many -- much of this I wouldn't repeat in polite company. You've reported one of the most mild, and in fact there are two findings. One, this is not just defamation. It was an action for defamation, as well as a tort of invasion of privacy. And there is a finding, first, that this was done intentionally to create a negatively charged and ominous environment, and this is not a matter of speech-related issues. It is simply the use of false and defamatory and privacy-invading communications, or worse, or attempt to improperly coerce payment of money in tribute for -- for desisting from that type of activity. All right. Now, those are the findings against you. So suppose I agreed with you hypothetically that that, with all these findings, is nonetheless protected by the First Amendment. All right? Now, suppose, in other words, you convince me of that. Now, I want to know how to write my opinion on that assumption to protect what I was worried about yesterday, that a woman who has a boyfriend or a husband is being continuously harassed in -- with methods similar to this one. See, it's easy to transpose those two cases which are both on my mind. And I want to know if in your opinion that these restraining orders, which try to prevent this kind of thing, among others, are unconstitutional, if there's a way of distinguishing them, if you could possibly win on what theory. And what I'm trying to get you to do is to say is it absolute. Are there limits? If so, what?
 I would suggest three different ways in which you could write the opinion that distinguished the case. The first is that this injunction is vastly overbroad, that even if there can be an injunction to say that Ulysses Tory and Ruth Craft can never again say anything about Johnnie Cochran in any public forum, that I can never speak about Johnnie Cochran would violate the First Amendment. A second way of distinguishing is that defamation is different, that when the First Amendment was adopted, the clear history was that above all it was to prevent prior restraints, and that injunctions were not permitted in defamation actions. That's quite different than a harassment action. And third, as I've argued, what makes this different is the basis for this injunction is speech protected by the First Amendment. With regard to the findings that you referred to, you mentioned two. The first is invasion of privacy. Your Honor, the only privacy claim in this case was false light invasion of privacy. California law is clear. When there is a defamation action and a false light claim, the false light claim is automatically dismissed as duplicative when it's based on the same fact. The second basis you pointed --
 Mr. Chemerinsky, this case comes up to us from a California appellate court. Surely they know California law better than we do.
 Yes, Your Honor, but they did not base their decision on the privacy claim because California law is clear that when it's false light invasion of privacy brought together with a defamation action, the false light claim is dismissed. That's a California case, Couch v. San Jose Unified School District.
 Well, we're not going to debate among ourselves over what California law is.
 No, Your Honor. All I'm saying is it's important to be clear about what the privacy claim is. As I was saying to Justice Breyer, there may be privacy claims that give rise to injunctions. Harassment claims may give rise to injunctions, but not the privacy claim in this case which was just about false light, which even the California Court of Appeal admitted is treated together with defamation.
 Suppose this picketing had taken place in front of his house, every day in front of his house.
 Your Honor, under Frisby v. Schultz, that would be a different situation. Under Frisby v. Schultz, this Court said --
 All right. Well -- well, then this -- this argument you're making, oh, never, never, the sky is falling and so forth, I -- I think we have to be more precise here. I think if it were in front of his house, it would be different. If he had alleged $10 worth of monetary damages, it would be disparaging the quality of his services, which would be a trade libel, and the Restatement at least -- I don't know California law -- says that you -- would you agree that you can enjoin a trade libel --
 Well, Your Honor --
 -- that disparages quality of goods to the serious injury of a -- of a business?
 Actually, Your Honor, the vast majority of cases have held that you cannot have an injunction for product defamation. And so I think while that's a different and more difficult question, most courts have said no even there. And Your Honor, I'm not saying there can never be injunctions. But I am saying that this Court has said there's a very strong and heavy presumption against injunctions, and that never, not once in the 214-year history of the First Amendment, has this Court ever upheld an injunction as a remedy in a defamation action. And, Your Honor --
 Well, if -- if this under -- the underlying claim seems to be that Mr. Cochran is essentially being blackmailed; that is, this -- this -- your client wants tribute to go away. And you say, yes, but it's defamation. It's a defamation action. Therefore, damages is the only remedy. Is there nothing that one can do to stop another from engaging in blackmail?
 Yes, Your Honor, there is. If this was blackmail or extortion, Johnnie Cochran could have filed a criminal complaint with the police. He could have civilly sued for blackmail or extortion. But, Your Honor, this wasn't extortion.
 What kind of a jurisprudence is it that a person can go to jail but that he's freed from an injunction? I mean, why -- why do we do this?
 But Your Honor, that's because this Court has said that injunctions of speech are even worse than criminal penalties. I would refer this Court --
 But -- but why -- is that true in every case? I mean, take the timid person who's not sure -- I know the law doesn't protect the timid person in the first area, but let's -- let's assume the timid person is not sure. So he wants -- he wants to get an equitable ruling first, declaratory judgment. He -- and he would take an injunction. That's certainly much easier than going to jail.
 But, Your Honor, I'd remind you of this Court's language in the Vance v. Universal Amusement where the Court said presumption against prior restraints is heavier and the degree of protection broader than against limits on criminal penalties.
 I know, but I'm asking you why that -- why that should be. If -- if you asked a person not familiar with our jurisprudence, which is worse, having an injunction that you can argue about or going to jail, I -- I think they would say that going to jail is worse.
 But, Your Honor, in terms of the First Amendment, there are reasons why an injunction has always been regarded as worse.
 Always? Do you want to apply that to an harassment action too against a woman who has the restraining order? No restraining orders in divorce cases in case they're against speech because even if violence is threatened, even if -- et cetera. I mean, how -- how far do you want to push that principle?
 Your Honor, I don't want to push the principle at all to harassment. I believe that injunctions are completely appropriate in harassment actions. I think it is quite important to note that the California harassment statute expressly excludes speech which is protected by the First Amendment as being a basis for harassment. The history of the First Amendment is different. To go back to Justice Kennedy's question, it's always been thought that an injunction strikes at the very heart of the First Amendment because, as Justice Scalia pointed out --
 Why can't we say that speech that is -- is being used for extortion is different, just as speech which is being used for harassment is different? And just as you can get an injunction for the latter, you ought to be able to get an injunction for the former. Not all speech, but only when speech is being used to -- to extort money.
 Yes, Your Honor, there can be an injunction for extortion, but this was not extortion. There was never the criminal complaint. There was never the civil action. And it didn't meet the requirements for extortion. Your Honor, California law, Penal Code section 518, defines extortion as, quote, the obtaining of property from another with his consent induced by a wrongful use of force or fear. There wasn't the wrongful use of force or fear. Now, it may be that Ulysses Tory was speaking --
 Here I think there was -- why isn't there a use of fear when, you know, you're afraid of this person destroying your business by calling you a liar and a cheat? Wasn't Mr. Cochran afraid of that -- of that happening?
 Your Honor, this Court is required to do an independent review of the record under Bose v. Consumers Union. There's no indication that Mr. Cochran suffered that fear from Mr. Tory being outside. It's true that Mr. Tory may have believed that he was owed money by Johnnie Cochran and was also trying to encourage Mr. Cochran to pay. But this Court has said in cases like NAACP v. Claiborne Hardware speech does not lose its protective character simply because it may embarrass others or coerce them into action.
 Mr. Chemerinsky, the district -- I mean, the trial court made certain findings and I'm looking at page 42 of the joint appendix. The first is that these statements were actually made for the purpose of inducing Cochran to pay Tory amounts of money which Tory was not entitled. That's one finding. And then finding 24, despite repeated requests, Tory has refused to cease picketing unless he was paid money -- a monetary settlement by Cochran. And then 27 that says this is simply use of false and privacy-invading communications to coerce or attempt to improperly coerce payment of money in tribute for desisting from that type of activity. And those sound like findings. It's true that the label of extortion has been put on it, but it certainly does sound like the -- that the purpose of the speech was to extract money not owed.
 But, Your Honor, since this is a defamation action, not an extortion action, the rules under the First Amendment for defamation have to apply. Under the rules of the First Amendment for defamation, injunctions are not available to public officials or public figures.
 Well, so this finding -- the court shouldn't have made these findings? It was irrelevant?
 Well, Your Honor, I believe that the --
 Was there an objection to the testimony that established this?
 Yes, Your Honor. Mr. Tory, who was appearing pro se in the trial court, from the very outset objected that he was being held liable for speech protected by the First Amendment.
 No, but it seems to me -- and I think what bothers me is -- is what bothers Justice Kennedy. It seems to me that the argument you just made is an argument that given the pleadings in this case, the findings that Justice Ginsburg just quoted really were irrelevant findings, that they should not have gotten -- that the court should not have gotten into extortion and so on and should not have provided a remedy for extortion, quite apart from the fact of whether it's an appropriate remedy, constitutional or otherwise. And that, it seems to me, is -- is something that we -- we are not here to touch. That's a question of California law. What we are here to touch is, number one, whether the injunction is overbroad with respect to pure speech, and maybe we are here -- that we have a question about the -- the breadth of the case we took. But maybe we are here to determine whether there can be an injunction against blackmail or harassing activities. But I -- I think we're not here to decide whether California could have gotten to the question of blackmail, harassment, and injunction for that. Do you agree with that?
 No, Your Honor. I certainly agree with the first point. One issue before this Court is whether this injunction is overbroad, and it clearly is in terms of the breadth of speech that's regulated and whose regulated. But as to the second point that you make, this is a defamation action, and thus the issue before this Court, clearly presented in the question presented, is whether a permanent injunction can be issued in a defamation case remedy when the plaintiff is a public figure.
 Well, it can certainly -- the -- the issue is certainly before us as to whether such an injunction can be issued with respect to defamation pure and simple. But the findings that Justice Ginsburg has -- has read and part of the order in question here seems to go beyond pure defamation. It goes to the kind of demonstrative activity which plausibly is found to have been in aid of extortion. And that, it seems to me, is an entirely different question. We may -- I'm not saying we will, but we may agree with you that it's overbroad. We may agree with you that as to pure speech, you can't enjoin it. But that doesn't necessarily mean that every part of this injunction is wrong, and it seems to me it is irrelevant as to whether the -- the State of -- the courts of California should have reached extortion.
 I would disagree in this way, Your Honor. Bose v. Consumers Union makes clear that when it is a defamation action, this Court and every appellate court has to do an independent review of the record.
 With respect to the defamation, pure and simple. I agree with you. We -- there is a heightened standard of review, but I don't think that addresses one way or the other what the standard should be when an action in the State courts has been treated as an action both for defamation and for extortion or harassment.
 But, Your Honor, it was not treated here as an action for extortion or harassment --
 I understand. Mr. Chemerinsky, let me put the question this way. Suppose a State does not have a civil action for extortion. It provides criminal remedies but no civil action for extortion. Why does the Constitution not permit us to treat, in that State at least, a civil action for defamation which has within it elements of distortion differently from pure defamation?
 Your Honor, I would say the history of the First Amendment is different. A State can create a civil action then for extortion at the urging of this Court, but if you open the door to injunctions in defamation cases, then there's the possibility that in any defamation case, somebody might plead something about extortion, and injunctions will not be rare but will be the norm.
 May I ask this -- may I ask this question? Supposing the only thing he did was to carry a sign that said Johnnie is a crook, a liar, and a thief, and the trial judge finds that is false, and he's carrying it in a sign, could the trial judge enjoin him from carrying that sign in front of Johnnie Cochran's office?
 No, Your Honor, because the law is clear that injunctions are not a permissible remedy in defamation cases.
 What's the best authority you have for that proposition?
 Near v. Minnesota would be the best authority where this Court said clearly that injunctive relief should not be awarded in a defamation case.
 Add to Justice Stevens' -- add to Justice Stevens' hypothetical that he shows that he's losing some clients.
 But, Your Honor, even -- yes, Your Honor. But I don't think that changes the hypothetical in terms of enjoining the defamatory speech.
 Would you add too that he's judgment-proof?
 Well, again, as I said to Justice O'Connor, I don't think it can matter whether he's judgment-proof because we can't have a different rule that we allow poor people's speech to enjoin and not wealthy people.
 You're saying -- you're saying that a State cannot constitutionally prohibit someone from making false statements in front of the business that causes the business to lose money.
 Well, Your Honor, there are other causes of action that may allow that. If it could be --
 So I'm -- my question is, is this constitutional to prohibit this conduct?
 Not in a defamation action, Your Honor.
 That's --
 I --
 -- that's not the question.
 But what is your authority for that proposition?
 Well, I would say that the authority comes from the fact that never in 214 years has this Court ever upheld an injunction in a defamation case.
 Have we ever set aside an injunction that did that?
 Well, not under those facts.
 Have we done it either way?
 No. That's correct, Your Honor.
 Have we ever -- have we ever considered a case where there's a strong element of extortion involved?
 I would say yes, extortion for Austin v. Keith. There was speech to pressure, and yet this Court said even though the speech was to pressure, it's still protected by the First Amendment. I'd like to save the rest of the time for rebuttal, if that's permissible.
 Very well, Mr. Chemerinsky.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Cole, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice Rehnquist, and may it please the Court: For years, Mr. Tory has relentlessly targeted Johnnie Cochran with a pattern of defamatory speech in a public forum for purpose of causing Mr. Cochran to pay Mr. Tory money in tribute for ceasing from this unprotected activity. He admitted at trial he intended to engage in this conduct. He was doing it just so he could be paid money, and when asked if he would continue to do so, he stated he would.
 Well, do you -- do you defend the injunction in its entirety?
 Yes --
 In other words, the -- the -- Mr. Chemerinsky didn't have too much chance to -- to get very far into it, but one of his points was that there was -- quite apart from any injunction against picketing, harassment, et cetera, there was an injunction simply against speech on a given subject directed to a lot of people with no limit of time. With respect to that last aspect, do you defend the injunction?
 Yes. First of all, I don't believe it was directed to a lot of people. As this --
 Well, it was directed, number one, to a named person who was not a party to the case, and it was directed to agents and employees of -- of the named party. So, I -- I assume that Mr. Cochran probably has a fair number of agents and employees, so it does seem like a large number of people.
 I believe this Court said in Madsen that that would raise an abstract controversy that Mr. Tory doesn't have standing to attack the injunction for other persons who are not before the court. No aider or abetter has ever been served with this injunction. Ms. Craft has never been served with this injunction. Only Mr. Tory. So I don't believe --
 Well, let me ask you a law school question. In -- given the injunction on its face, with that breadth, is that injunction defensible with respect not to picketing, not to harassment, simply to speech in a public place?
 I defend the injunction, and respondent defends the injunction on the ground that it is conduct that was being enjoined --
 I -- I asked you --
 -- from the use of unprotected speech.
 -- to exclude the -- the issue of conduct. I said forget the injunction for a moment with respect to picketing, with respect to harassment, and we'll say with respect to blackmail, since that has come up. Forget that. Simply take the portion of the injunction that enjoins speech by these people, associates, agents, et cetera. On the subject matter of the injunction for all time, do you defend that injunction?
 Yes, we defend the injunction.
 Let's take specifically the words of the injunction. It's against orally uttering statements about Cochran, just orally uttering statements about Cochran.
 Yes.
 You say that someone can be enjoined --
 Based upon the unique facts of this case, Justice Ginsburg, I say somebody can be enjoined. I don't say that in the abstract.
 Well, you can't square that with the Near case at all. I -- I mean, the -- the injunction on its face in part 2 has the appearance of being overly broad.
 But in Near, they set forth certain factors, and those factors included that it was not a private redress of private wrongs. The information was of legitimate public concern. Neither of those elements are present in this action.
 You don't know that.
 You don't --
 You don't know what future speech is going to be. His future thing may be, you know, Johnnie Cochran shouldn't be elected mayor of San Francisco. That would be a -- a question of public concern.
 But, Justice Scalia, what I'm relying on is the fact that he has engaged in 3 years in a pattern of continuing, repetitive conduct.
 Well, what -- what you're saying is that an -- an injunction can be overbroad based on past wrongful conduct. And there is simply no authority for that proposition.
 I'm not suggesting that this injunction is necessarily overboard based upon that proposition because I believe there are --
 But we have just pointed out that it -- that it -- it prohibits lawful, harmless, truthful speech.
 I disagree with that, Justice Kennedy.
 Well, it does on its face. I mean, it is clearly overbroad. Now, what should we do about that?
 Well, if you're asking me, based upon the breadth of the injunction, what I -- if -- if there was -- are you asking me what I would do to modify the injunction? You could merely strike -- you could leave intact paragraph 2 and you could strike simply subsections (ii) and (iii) as being unconstitutionally overbroad.
 Now, let -- let me ask you about that. Let's -- let's assume, for the moment, that a majority of the Court would find that some of these provisions are overly broad. Is there any authority that tells us what to do next? This is not like a statute where we have to save the statute. Do we have any obligation to save the injunction? Send it back and let it be done. Let it be done all over again. I mean, why -- why should we rewrite it up here? Do you have any authority that requires us or permits us to do that?
 Yes. In -- in Madsen, Justice Kennedy, you struck -- the Court struck certain provisions as being unconstitutionally overbroad and left certain intact. So there's no reason why you can't look at this injunction, which clearly does not attack paragraph 1. The -- they do not attack paragraph 1. They do not attack paragraph 3. They only level their attack at paragraph 2, and paragraph 2, by striking subsections (ii) and (iii), would then be limited to the exact conduct in issue, which is picketing.
 So -- so if -- before leaving that point, what the injunction prohibits is that Tory and those acting in concert, cooperation, or participation with him from, in a public forum, orally uttering statements about Cochran. All right. That's what it says. Now, do you think that if Tory or someone acting in cooperation with him says, I've had a change of heart, Johnnie Cochran is a marvelous person, and he says that on television -- do you think that individual at that time has violated this injunction?
 Absolutely not.
 Absolutely not. Because? Because?
 First of all, that's --
 It said the words. They violated the words. It was a statement, but he has not violated the injunction because?
 Because I don't believe that's a public forum.
 Oh, no, no. He does it in a public forum. In fact, he hires Disney Hall. (Laughter.)
 And moreover, he gets on stage and announces it. Okay? There's no problem about a public forum. So, now, why doesn't it violate the injunction?
 Your -- Your Honor, I believe there are alternative channels of communication here.
 No. I thought what you were going to say -- but you're not. So I'm very interested in that, and I'm glad I asked. I thought you were going to say when it says uttering statements, it means statements of the kind or identical to those we have identified earlier in this opinion.
 Well, I was --
 But, now, you haven't said that. I said it, and I think it's too late for you to say it. (Laughter.)
 I think I said it when I said there was a continuing pattern of repetitive conduct under Pittsburgh Press, over 3 years that that was the conduct that he has engaged in. And that was clearly the purpose of this injunction, Justice Breyer. We know that. And the purpose of the injunction is to enjoin conduct that's designed to extort money from Mr. Cochran.
 In more than one case, we've said that an injunction has to be precise and clear and not leaving things to the imagination.
 Well, I think this is precise and clear. Based upon the breadth of the injunction, it's very clear. Based upon this man's prior repetitive conduct of defaming Mr. Cochran with unprotected speech for the purpose of attempting to extort money from him --
 Well, it's -- it's --
 But nothing in the injunction refers to prior conduct.
 That's right. It's --
 The injunction just speaks for itself. It doesn't say what -- doing what you used to do or anything like that.
 The injunction --
 You cannot picket Cochran or Cochran's law firm. Period.
 If we restricted the injunction to specific words used such as you cannot picket Johnnie Cochran's law firm and say he's a crook, liar, and thief, the response will be that he'll come up with five new words to defame Mr. Cochran for purposes of extorting --
 Well, maybe there are different grades of specificity. Maybe it doesn't meet precisely the same words, but I think there are other ways to draft it that say no picketing. Period.
 Well, there could be no picketing for purposes of -- no -- which contains defamatory speech for purposes of extorting Mr. Cochran. But --
 All I'm suggesting is just draft it -- just excising (ii) and (iii) from paragraph 2 would not necessarily solve the problem completely. Because subparagraph (i) says picketing Cochran or Cochran's law firm, which is a pretty broad prohibition.
 Well, I would disagree based upon the prior -- continuing course of -- of repetitive conduct and the fact that this -- over a period 3 years, once a week, this man spent 3 to 4 hours a day of his time defaming Mr. Cochran at his law office. When we enjoined him from doing so at his law office, he moved it to the Los Angeles Superior Court. And I think the fact that Mr. Cochran is a public figure actually favors the breadth of this injunction. If this was not a public figure, then the public forum issue would not be as effective. But because Mr. Cochran is a public figure, the only way he gets protection is in the public forum because this gentleman could move his picketing down to west L.A., Santa Monica Boulevard, nowhere near a courthouse, and to a public figure he can inflict the same damage to reputation. And that is the problem we were contending with in attempting to draft an injunction that was not overbroad and yet could control Mr. Tory --
 You -- you did draft this injunction. It wasn't the -- an inspiration from the judge unaided by your advocacy. Is that so?
 It --
 This -- the terms of this injunction.
 Were aided -- were aided by my advocacy, Your Honor.
 Aided and abetted.
 Well said, Justice Rehnquist. What I'm suggesting here is Mr. Cochran would have been faced with -- he has no remedy. Injunctive relief is the only remedy. And he would be faced with a multiplicity of actions --
 Why? Why couldn't he just be enjoined from -- from similar defamation? I mean, this -- this enjoins him from -- from true speech. At least he could -- he could have been enjoined from in the future defaming Cochran in the same manner. And if he did that, then -- then he could be punished.
 I think we would be -- that injunction then would be attacked on being vague or ambiguous, that Mr. Tory wouldn't have sufficient notice as to what he was allowed to say and not allowed to say. I guarantee you that was --
 Well, if -- if that's so, then maybe Mr. Chemerinsky is right. We -- we shouldn't have injunctions. If you're saying that injunctions can't be narrowly tailored, it seems to me that you're playing right into the argument that the petitioner is making.
 No. I think they can be tailored. I just don't think they can be that narrowly tailored. And I don't think in this case, which I believe that the test we should be applying if we're going to balance, is this -- there's no need for this injunction to be drafted in the least restrictive means. I also continue to advance the argument that this -- the facts of this case are unique. It's the use of speech to engage in unprotected conduct. This -- this conduct is not protected by the First Amendment. The conduct of attempting to extort money from Mr. Cochran is not protected. If that is not protected, then I believe we can craft --
 You can -- you can certainly have, you know, some unprotected speech in connection with extortion, like give me $5 million or I'll shoot you. But that -- this was a far cry from that. In other words, it isn't just addressing the victim and saying give me something. It's denouncing the victim, which gets into free speech here.
 It certainly does, Justice Rehnquist. But what I am suggesting is there was no remedy for Mr. Cochran that would have avoided a multiplicity of actions other than to draft the injunction in a form that would preclude Mr. Tory from engaging in the same conduct without regard to whether it was -- and to let him know clearly -- give him a safe harbor as to what he could and could not say.
 But the injunction isn't limited to the same conduct.
 But I don't think it needs to be because of the pattern and practice that this man has engaged in over 3 years. And if we take the example, which is so he has a change of heart and suddenly he now wants to praise Mr. Cochran and that's become his -- and he's going to promote him as mayor of San Francisco, he can certainly go into the court and modify the injunction.
 I thought he lived in L.A. (Laughter.)
 I think he'd like to get him up to San Francisco. (Laughter.)
 He can certainly seek to modify the injunction, and that, as I pointed out in a subsequent letter brief, there's -- California doesn't adopt the collateral bar rule. And therefore, he has a check and balance in this case. Under People v. Gonzales, 12 Cal.4th 805, the collateral bar rule has no application in the State of California. So in the unlikely event that Mr. Tory was engaged in speech praising Mr. Cochran, one, and two, in the -- in the more unlikely event that someone was going to attempt to cite him for contempt for engaging in protected speech, he could contest, under First Amendment grounds, the enforcement of this injunction in the State of California because the collateral bar rule has no impact.
 Well, I'm -- I'm baffled by that. What you're saying is that the injunction -- we're just all wasting our time? The injunction doesn't mean anything?
 No, no, no, no. Justice Kennedy, all I'm saying is --
 I -- I fell off the track here.
 All I'm -- all I'm saying is that if the collateral bar rule was in effect, you would waive your right to contest. You don't have a right to contest the constitutionality of the injunction on First Amendment grounds or constitutional grounds when it's seek to be enforced against you. That's not a defense in a contempt proceeding. California does not adopt that rule. Therefore, Mr. Tory can always -- if he is engaged in protected speech, he can easily contend --
 Oh, yes, but he's different from other citizens because he's at -- he's at risk of a contempt citation.
 I don't dispute that.
 I mean, his speech is being chilled with -- with respect to protected speech.
 But there's nothing unusual --
 So the collateral bar rule doesn't help you at all because he's subject to a contempt citation.
 He's subject to it, but there's a check and balance there in terms of when you balance, the potential remedy for Mr. Cochran -- what -- what is going to give Mr. Cochran the remedy he needs? And if we balance that against the -- the breadth of this injunction, I think we have to look at -- one of the biggest concerns about prior restraints, when analyzed in terms of injunctions, is the collateral bar rule.
 But it would be so easy. I mean, it's virtually no burden. I take it what you're saying is that this injunction in paragraph 2 at its heart is aimed at in public forums, keeping insults suggesting he was a crook against Johnnie Cochran unless you pay me $10,000. Then I'll stop. Okay? Now, at its heart, that's what it's aimed at.
 That's exactly --
 And you are saying if in fact it's ever enforced outside that heartland, you can have a defense. It would violate the First Amendment. But since it's so easy just to write those words we just said right in paragraph 2, why shouldn't the judge have to do it? It's so easy. Say this is aimed at the heartland just as I said it and you said it, and it doesn't apply outside of it.
 And I have no dispute with that, Justice Breyer. I agree that was the whole purpose for the injunction. That's the basis of the injunction. And you could always remand for further proceedings, consistent with any opinion you would write, that the injunction has to be tailored to -- to deal with defamatory conduct, which is designed to extort or with the intent to extort. And I --
 That's what he's arguing. You're -- you're conceding that it's overbroad.
 I'm saying if this Court -- well, I'm gleaning the impression that this Court thinks it's overbroad.
 Ah, you're very perceptive. (Laughter.)
 And having gleaned that perception, I'm trying to suggest that, number one, there was no attack on paragraphs 1 and 3, and now we're focused on paragraph 2. And paragraph 2 can be tailored, as you have indicated, Justice Scalia, I think consistent with First Amendment issues. And I think it's important to point out that if we take away injunctive relief in a defamation action in this day -- modern age --
 You're sort of saying the opposite of what your opponent said. If we take it away, has it ever been there?
 It's never been there.
 What are we taking away?
 I -- I agree it's never -- you've never found it there and you've never said it can't be there.
 How does California work in that respect? Because what I've been thinking of in my mind is that maybe we shouldn't decide this in terms of State law boxes, that California seems to have an action. Let's call it a buzz action to get away from words. And what that action is it's a defamation but a certain kind. It's defamation accompanied by extortion. And when you have defamation accompanied by extortion -- call it whatever you want -- an injunction is proper in these circumstances. Now, can we decide it in such a way that we're not talking about all defamation actions? We are talking about this beast in California which uses the word defamation but also finds injunction and therefore issues -- also finds extortion and therefore issues an injunction.
 Yes, I think that you could limit the injunction to defamatory speech of a similar nature designed to extort.
 Would -- would that make Mr. Cochran happy? What -- what's the big deal about extortion? I mean, suppose this same conduct occurs in the future, but he doesn't say I'll stop if you give me a lot of money. He just pickets every day and says Cochran is a shyster, don't do any business with Cochran. Do you think Mr. Cochran would be any -- any happier simply because the guy says I'll -- hasn't said I'll stop if you pay me $10,000?
 No, and I think that would be subject to the same injunctive relief. I think this case is unique with the extortion element, but I don't disagree, Justice Scalia, that that is why any decision that says injunctions in defamation actions would be improper. I think people would start defaming with impunity.
 You've got to give us some line. I mean, the only reason we're grabbing onto extortion is that -- that there's reluctance to say you can issue injunctions in all defamation actions. Now, what -- what limitation do you want to place upon the ability to issue an injunction if it is not defamation combined with extortion?
 I don't think you need to place a limitation other than you can enjoin the defamatory conduct. Take, for example, the Internet. A posting goes on of a -- of a business that -- a startup company. It can't -- damages of -- for a startup company -- they're very difficult to prove.
 But then you run into the public figure. I mean, that's a much more dangerous kind of rule of law, isn't it? I mean, a pure defamation action against a public figure, which they want to say this is. You can write all kinds of things about public figures. People can and do, for better or for worse. Do -- is there any authority for issuing in a pure defamation action an injunction?
 There's no authority, but there's no authority that says you can't do it. But what I am suggesting is in -- is in a pure defamation action that's not tied to any specific wrongful conduct, there's no reason why you couldn't enjoin. For example, if you found that a specific item was defamatory on its face, such as a posting on the Internet, the only way to get that posting off the Internet would be to enjoin it because damages aren't going to solve the problem. And if it's -- even if it's purely defamatory, you could restrict it to that purely defamatory posting, similar to -- to the obscenity cases where you've reviewed a film, you found it to be obscene, and then you preclude it. There are procedural safeguards and you preclude it in the future.
 But you've just said something that I think that's inconsistent with your earlier presentation. You said you could enjoin that posting. Here you said it wouldn't be effective just to enjoin the particular placards that were used, the particular words because then there would be other words. So the same question could come up with an Internet posting if you had an injunction not simply on what was posted but anything about this particular individual that might be posted in the future.
 Well, Justice Ginsburg, I think where that leaves us is you'd have to engage in some sort of balancing about the -- how narrowly tailored the injunction is and does it provide a sufficient remedy and, you know -- and -- and in this -- and what test we would analyze it under, strict scrutiny, intermediate scrutiny, or the Ward test. And -- and I think that in applying those tests, you'd have to come to a balance, and if the balance is that you're going to limit it to a specific type of speech or -- then that -- that would be a -- a reasonable limit, and if it creates a multiplicity of actions, well, so be it. But at least there's a remedy for that posting or postings of a similar nature. So --
 Now, you -- you -- to the extent that you're complaining about extortion-like conduct, something else that you drafted -- I'm looking at the complaint on page 7 of the joint appendix. You have identified all defamatory, including with the false light invasion of privacy, but you don't have any claim that looks like blackmail.
 If you'd -- if I could direct you, Justice Ginsburg, to page 12 of the joint appendix at paragraphs (j) and (k) of the verified complaint, you will see that we alleged in a verified complaint that he'd engaged in three previous efforts of this same type of conduct, one. And two, paragraph (k), that Tory is in the business of professionally extorting monies from innocent persons and business --
 I -- I was going to ask you about that. Were there findings to substantiate the allegations?
 Findings to substantiate --
 Specifically about the extorting money from the bank and the oil company.
 No, Justice Kennedy, there were not.
 No findings.
 There was some testimony only on one of those issues, which was the oil company. There was no findings on this issue. But then I would refer you to paragraph (k) which specifically refers to extorting of monies. And also in my opening statement, as is reflected in the trial's transcript, the -- the first thing I said is this is speech designed for an improper purpose. It's unprotected speech designed to extort money from Mr. Cochran. That was the whole theme --
 But what -- what I mean is could you have -- without using the label defamation, have stated a claim for extortion or blackmail? I'm not looking at your particular allegations but how you described on page 1 of the complaint what you were suing for: libel, libel per se, slander, slander per se, and invasion of privacy.
 I think we could have pled extortion had we chose to. We could have pled inference with advantageous business relations. We probably could have pled California's --
 Does California law require you to label the type of the cause of action or is it notice pleading based on facts?
 Notice pleading based on facts, but we do label the causes of action. The -- the point I'm trying to make is whether every cause of action was pled, if the conduct is extortion, which is what the judge implicitly found by findings 20 and 27, that conduct is not protected. And whether we named the cause of action correct in the complaint or we sued for that specified cause of action, doesn't change what it is that we were seeking relief for, which is stopping this man from defaming Mr. Cochran until he was paid money. We attempted to achieve that. We thought we did a fair job in paragraphs 1 and 3, which they don't attack and I agree is not fairly included within the question which has been certified here, nor is an attack on the underlying finding. But we attempted in paragraph 2, broadly I agree, to avoid a multiplicity of actions and to give Mr. Tory other channels of communication other than the public forum where he is engaged in a continuing course of repetitive conduct to defame Mr. Cochran. He -- and -- and this is -- one point that I want to stress. We don't view this injunction as being violated if he went on TV, he went on the radio, he went in the newspapers. We don't view those as public forums under the definition that this Court has provided. Those are not public forums. We are not concerned about that. We do not believe that those events will occur. We did not seek to protect them. So we have given Mr. Tory an unlimited venue to speak, but we said you can't do this in the public forum because of your continuing course of repetitive conduct, 3 years, once a week, 52 times a year, over 150 times, 4 hours a day. And with that, I would submit that while the injunction is broad, I don't believe it's a unconstitutional prior restraint, and to the extent this Court believes it is overbroad, I believe striking subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of paragraph 2 would solve the problem, or alternatively, that in conjunction with a suggestion that it needs to be narrowed to deal with the speech and conduct in issue. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Cole. Mr. Chemerinsky, you have 4 minutes remaining.
 Thank you. Justice Breyer kindly invited my thoughts about how an opinion might be written, and there are three different ways not mutually exclusive. One is that this injunction is vastly overbroad for all the reasons that have been identified. Mr. Cole said a couple of things. One, he said that Mr. Tory can go to court and ask for modification of the injunction, but that's what makes this a prior restraint, that Mr. Tory can only speak again if he goes to court and gets permission. Also, he said at the end that Mr. Tory can go before the media. However, under California law, under Damon v. Ocean Hill, the media is defined as a public forum. A second way the opinion could be written is that this for speech protected by the First Amendment. Justice Ginsburg, you asked me at the outset whether that's in the scope of the question presented. Well, it is directly relevant to what Mr. Cole was saying. Because it's all opinion, all hyperbole it is protected by the First Amendment and can't be the basis for an extortion claim.
 Yes, but you're asking us now to -- the -- the trial court found there was defamation, and now you want to argue, no, it wasn't defamation. It was mere opinion. I really don't see how that's included in the question presented.
 I think it is because it goes to the question whether the injunction is permissible. But I go on to the third way that the opinion could be written, and that's that injunctions are not permissible as a remedy in a defamation case. We agree that if there is a cause of action for extortion, it can have an injunction as a remedy. We agree if the cause of action is for harassment, there can be an injunction as a remedy. But those have specific elements that have to be met. Those elements weren't met in this case. History is clear that injunctions aren't allowed in defamation cases, and also, Your Honor, it's quite important that Mr. Cole even said you can't craft a narrow injunction in a defamation case. Any injunction is either too narrow or too broad. In Near v. Minnesota, this Court said that it was telling that in 150 years of the history of the First Amendment, there had never been an injunction approved by this Court in a defamation case. We're now 70 years later than that. To approve an injunction in a case like this, even though it's called defamation plus extortion, will open the door to injunctions as a routine matter in defamation cases across the country. No --
 There have been -- there have been injunctions against harassing conduct, threatening, stalking.
 Yes, Your Honor, and we have no objection to injunctions of that sort. What we object to is an injunction as a remedy in a defamation case and an injunction that is directed at speech. That's what the First Amendment prohibits. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Chemerinsky. The case is submitted.
 We'll now hear argument in Van Orden against Perry. Mr. Chemerinsky.
 Good morning, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: On the grounds of the Texas State Capitol, there is one evident religious symbol that conveys a powerful religious message that there is a theistic God and that God has committed rules for behavior. Of course, the government may put religious symbols on its property, including the Ten Commandments, but must do so in a way that does not endorse religion or a particular religion, but does not have the purpose of advancing religion, but does not favor any particular religion.
 Mr. Chemerinsky, I suppose that opening statement suggests that you think that Thanksgiving proclamations are also unconstitutional, which were recommended by the very first Congress, the same Congress that proposed the First Amendment.
 No, Your Honor, I would - I'm sorry.
 They also refer to one God, to a theistic ruler of the universe.
 No, Your Honor, I think the Thanksgiving proclamations would be constitutional. I think it's analogous to the legislative prayers that this Court upheld in Chambers v. Marsh. I think it's very different than this Ten Commandments monument.
 All right. But then you have to narrow your opening statement and say that certainly the State can acknowledge the existence of a unitary God without offending the Establishment Clause.
 Yes, Your Honor, but it all depends on how it is done. Here the way in which it is done is the most powerful and profound religious message that this Court has ever considered on government property. Here you have a monument that proclaims not only there is a God, but God has dictated rules for behavior for those who follow him or her.
 I don't know whether that's any more profound or ultra-religious, super-religious than the prayer that the chaplain gives every day in the House.
 Your Honor, there is a difference between a prayer that a chaplain gives -- in Chambers v. Marsh, this Court emphasized that the prayer by the chaplain was a nonsectarian prayer. This is very much sectarian. This proclaims that there is a God. It proclaims --
 Well, I mean, I haven't read the prayer. So I would be surprised if I went through all the prayers and there was no mention, direct or indirect, of the Ten Commandments or a couple of them.
 Your Honor, I would be surprised because here, if you look at these commandments, it's that God has claimed that he is the only God, prohibiting idolatry, prohibiting graven images, prohibiting taking the name of the Lord and God in vain. Requiring observing of the sabbath. This is God dictating to God's followers rules for behavior.
 Is there any other -- I mean, you can continue if you want, but one difference which I've written down is you say that the difference between this and the prayer is that this is more profoundly religious. Is there any other difference, in your opinion?
 No. I think the key difference is --
 That's the difference? So if I happen to read these prayers in the Congress and I came to the conclusion that in terms of a religious message, I actually thought the prayers had the more religious message, then I should vote against you.
 No, Your Honor. There are, of course, other differences. As I said to Justice Scalia earlier, with regard to legislative prayer in Chambers versus Marsh, this Court said that there was a history going back to the very first Congress that allowed there to be those kinds of religious invocations. Ten Commandments monuments standing by themselves, as they do here, certainly are not of that historic origin.
 How about if they're packaged in a museum-like setting and there is some interest on the part of the State in preserving something.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 And displaying a whole variety of things?
 Of course, there can be Ten Commandments or any religious works as part of a museum setting. This isn't a museum setting, Your Honor. Every monument on the Texas --
 Is this a kind of a park? What do we regard this space as? What is it? Is it a park-like setting?
 It is a park-like setting. It is the acres of the State Capitol grounds. Every monument on the State Capitol grounds is there because the State legislature wanted to convey a particular message. It is a felony in Texas, an impeachable offense to put anything on the Capitol grounds without the approval of the legislature. Most of the monuments are there to honor war veterans. This is the only religious message anywhere on the Capitol grounds. And by itself --
 Well, would it be all right, in your view, if they put several others up for different religions? Then is it going to be okay?
 If the clear purpose and message was to honor the diversity of religions in Texas, it would then be permissible. If it were a series of displays like that frieze, the fifteen different --
 You don't object to that?
 Quite the contrary, I think it's a --
 Or the depiction on the door of the Court?
 Quite the contrary. This is exactly how the State may display the Ten Commandments.
 But the prayers in Congress don't do that and our Thanksgiving proclamations don't do that. They invoke a God, a unitary God, and that's contrary to the dictates of some religions that believe that there are a lot of gods.
 Yes, Your Honor, there is --
 We don't pray to gods, the prayers are always to God. You know, I don't see why the one is good and the other is bad. It's no answer to say, well, you know, the former has been around for a long time. Well, it has but it suggests what the framers and what our society for several hundred years has believed the Establishment Clause means. And it does not -- it is not too sectarian if it invokes a unitary God. Now, you're saying it becomes too sectarian when it invokes the Ten Commandments.
 No, Your Honor. I'm saying several things. As I said earlier, first, this Court in Chambers v. Marsh said that there was a unique history to legislative prayers. There isn't a similar history here.
 Mr. Chemerinsky, too, doesn't the venue count? After all, we have had the question of prayer in schools, and the Court has said that that was not all right. Prayer in the legislature was distinguished. So it's not just prayer anywhere that the government wants to have it is okay.
 Of course, Justice Ginsburg, the venue counts. And here the venue is very important. It is the corner between the Texas State Capitol and the Texas Supreme Court. And in that way, this monument standing alone does convey the government's endorsement for religion.
 Okay. But if the legislature itself can have its sessions opened with a prayer, can the legislature itself want to have the Ten Commandments posted within the legislative halls?
 Your Honor, I think there is a very different message that's conveyed.
 Can it do that?
 No, Your Honor, it can't post the Ten Commandments by itself in its legislative halls because that would then be the government endorsing expression for support for that message. It cannot be, Your Honor, that just because there is a legislative prayer, that any religious message anywhere on government property would then be permissible. As Justice Kennedy has said in his opinion for --
 But it's so hard to draw that line. If the legislature can open its own sessions attended by the public with a prayer, you say it cannot, in the same building, display the Ten Commandments.
 That's right, because the message from the government is quite different. The message with legislative prayers, as this Court found in Chambers v. Marsh, is a recognition of a long historical practice. But when it comes to the Ten Commandments, it really is different than even a legislative prayer. This declares not only there is a God, but that God has proclaimed rules for behavior. The Ten Commandments come from sacred texts. As Justice Kennedy said in his opinion of County of Allegheny, certainly a city council could not put atop the city hall building a large Latin cross, even if that city council begins every day with a prayer. It cannot be there just because some religious messages are allowed, like a prayer, that everything then becomes permissible.
 Well, you know, in the First Amendment speech area, we're very, very strict. A moment's delay in publication is a constitutional crisis. And I'm not sure that we should carry that over to this area, where there is this obsessive concern with any mention of religion. That seems to me to show a hostility to religion. I just don't see a balanced dialogue in our cases or in these kinds of arguments.
 Your Honor, I don't believe there should be an obsessive concern with religion. If the Ten Commandments are displayed as part of an overall display of law givers, like that frieze, it's permissible. But when you put sacred texts somewhere on government property, then the message is that the government is endorsing --
 This is a classic avert your eyes. If an atheist walked by, he can avert his eyes, he can think about something else.
 I don't think so, Your Honor. This Court has said the key is that the government can't endorse religion, in a way that makes some feel like insiders and some like outsiders. Imagine somebody who is Muslim or Buddhist or Hindu --
 May I ask you this question. Supposing -- I recently read a case from the Seventh Circuit on what they did in Lacrosse, Wisconsin. And as we all know, this organization has donated Ten Commandments monuments all over the country. And what they did there is they sold the parcel back to the Eagles, their name, and put up a sign which read, this property is not owned or maintained by the City of Lacrosse, nor does the city endorse the religious expression thereon. Now, my question to you is, if there were a similar disclaimer on this monument, would that be an adequate remedy, in your view?
 It would be a harder case, but I don't think it would be an adequate remedy. And the reason is the city cannot put a religious symbol standing alone on government property just through disclaimer. That's exactly what County of Allegheny was. There the nativity scene in the courthouse had a plaque saying it was donated by others, but that can't excuse it because otherwise the city could put the large Latin cross just with a disclaimer.
 But if the test is whether the reasonable observer would think that the government is endorsing the religious message, wouldn't the disclaimer make it clear to the reasonable observer the government was not endorsing the message?
 I think the disclaimer would make it a harder case, but I think when you're dealing with the ground in a Texas State Capitol and the Texas Supreme Court, that placement, when you're dealing with the Ten Commandments, sacred texts, I still think that the message the reasonable observer would be that this is the government endorsing religion.
 At some point, would the State's interest in preserving old objects overcome the objection constitutionally?
 Yes, at some point, it could where it was clear to the reasonable observer that it was there because it was an old object.
 How did this monument get there? Was it in -- is it true that it was put in as a result of promoting a movie about the Ten Commandments?
 The record is unclear as to that. There are certainly many indications in the popular press that Cecil B. DeMille together with his movie, The Ten Commandments, worked with the Friends of Eagles to have these monuments put around the country. But there is nothing in the legislative history that links this particular monument to that.
 Isn't the display on the tablets on the top before you get to the text, before you get to, I am the Lord, thy God. I thought that those were replicas of what was in the film.
 I don't know that, Your Honor. I've tried to find out what that text is. It is not in Hebrew. It is not in a script that anyone was able to recognize. But it is important to notice that if you look at the entire monument, in addition to the Ten Commandments, there is also a Latin symbol of Christ, there is also Jewish Stars of David. And as I was saying in response to Justice Kennedy's question, imagine the Muslim or the Buddhist who walks into the State Supreme Court to have his or her case heard. That person will see this monument and realize it's not his or her government.
 I thought Muslims accept the Ten Commandments.
 No, Your Honor, the Muslims do not accept the sacred nature of the Ten Commandments, nor do Hindus, or those who believe in many gods, nor of course, do atheists. And for that matter, Your Honor, if a Jewish individual would walk by this Ten Commandments, and see that the first commandment isn't the Jewish version, I am the Lord, thy God, took you out of Egypt, out of slavery, would realize it's not his or her government either.
 You know, I think probably 90 percent of the American people believe in the Ten Commandments, and I'll bet you that 85 percent of them couldn't tell you what the ten are. (Laughter.)
 And when somebody goes by that monument, I don't think they're studying each one of the commandments. It's a symbol of the fact that government comes -- derives its authority from God. And that is, it seems to me, an appropriate symbol to be on State grounds.
 I disagree, Your Honor. For the State to put that symbol between its State Capitol and the State Supreme Court is to convey a profound religious message. If you're just saying, now, this isn't there for its secular reason. If someone were to read this monument, one sees that it emphasizes its religious content.
 It is a profound religious message, but it's a profound religious message believed in by the vast majority of the American people, just as belief in monotheism is shared by a vast majority of the American people. And our traditions show that there is nothing wrong with the government reflecting that. I mean, we're a tolerant society religiously, but just as the majority has to be tolerant of minority views in matters of religion, it seems to me the minority has to be tolerant of the majority's ability to express its belief that government comes from God, which is what this is about. As Justice Kennedy said, turn your eyes away if it's such a big deal to you.
 I disagree, Your Honor. Because this Court has said that above all, the government can't make some feel like they're insiders and some like outsiders. Even if they're the majority religion --
 Well, suppose a non-Christian, say a Muslim, comes before a judge who has very strong Christian beliefs, a very religious person. Does he feel like an outsider? And to require that we pretend that there is no religious motivation, no deep religious conviction on the part of many of our public officials seems to me to be a hostility toward religion.
 No, Your Honor. Imagine that judge put the Ten Commandments right above his or her bench. That would make some individuals feel like outsiders. Of course, many judges have religious beliefs, but they can't have the religious beliefs above them. And Your Honor, that's not hostility to religion. As this Court said in County of Allegheny, excluding religious symbols like the nativity scene, when displayed by itself, is not hostility to religion. Last year in Locke v. Davie, this Court said that to deny funding through the State of Washington for scholarships was not hostility to religion. Enforcing the Establishment Clause is not about hostility to religion. It is about making sure that every person who walks into that courtroom can feel that it's his or her government.
 That's an important point to me, but I don't see any way to get there in these difficult cases without making a practical judgment about whether that's really so. And the reason I say that, I start with Goldberg's opinion with Harlan in Schempp. And I know there are a lot of others, but I don't know if we've found a satisfactory test. And the point that they make is the government should be noninvolved with the religious, and it can't favor one over the other. But at the same time, we are a religious nation, where most people do believe in God and most of our institutions flow from the religious nature of our people. The City on the Hill, proclaim liberty throughout the land. All of those are religious. So how can the government, without what they call the pervasive and brooding commitment to secularism, which they think would be wrong, become necessarily involved because of our traditions, but not go too far? Now, I come to the conclusion very tentatively, there is no way to do it other than look at the divisive quality of the individual display case by case. And when I do that, I don't find much divisiveness here. Now, I'm exposing the whole thing not because I'm accepting it, but I would love to hear what you think.
 Yes, Your Honor, I think that the test that this Court has formulated do draw those lines. With regard to your point about divisiveness, the Ten Commandments is enormously divisive right now. I don't think we can ignore the social reality. The chief justice of the Alabama Supreme Court resigned, there are crowds outside today. I got hate messages this week, not because people care about the Ten Commandments as a secular document, but people care about the Ten Commandments because it's a profound religious message. And many want that religious message on government property. And I'm saying the government can put the Ten Commandments there as part of an overall display of law givers, because, Justice O'Connor, it's an overall display about diversity of religion. But when the Ten Commandments sits by itself it is, to use your word right now, enormously divisive. And that's why, from that criteria, it does violate the Establishment Clause.
 What about the opening of this Court's session today, in a manner that has been used since John Marshall, is that divisive because there are a lot of people who don't believe in God.
 But You Honor, I think that you have to distinguish between minimal religious content and maximum religious content.
 Mr. Chemerinsky, on that point, how much of the Ten Commandments -- I mean, once we get to thou shalt not kill or murder, then there are tenets to govern a society, but how much are strictly about the obligation that man owes to God?
 The first of the two tablets, the first five commandments, Your Honor, and of course religions belief this was written in God's own hand and given to Moses. It's believed that the first five commandments that you were referring to are God's prescriptions for religious behavior. The latter five, the others that you're referring to, were God's commands for secular behavior. All of these are God's commands to God's people. And that's what makes it different than the minimal religious content of God save this Honorable Court that Justice Scalia was referring to. The core of Texas's argument seems to be that it's there for secular purposes. But of course, if one looks at this monument, one sees that it's emphasizing the religious content and there is nothing that would lend the reasonable observer to see the secular content. It says in large letters, I am the Lord, thy God.
 Well, suppose, Mr. Chemerinsky, it was like Moses on that frieze where there are commandments showing, but there are only the sixth through tenth commandment. Would that be all right?
 Your Honor, if it was like Moses on that frieze together with fourteen other symbols, absolutely okay, because it would clear to the reasonable observer --
 But if we just had the Moses with the tablet that has the instructions for how people will conduct themselves in a civilized society versus worshiping the Lord.
 I think that would still be unconstitutional between the Texas State Capitol and the Texas Supreme Court because it would still be the State of Texas expressing the message that there is a God and that God has dictated these rules for behavior.
 Okay, what if you go one step further and there was simply a tablet without any embellishment about source saying, you know, thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not covet, et cetera, basically just the last five commandments, pure and simple. Would you have any objection on Establishment Clause grounds?
 If the tablets were by themselves in that way, between the Texas Supreme Court and the Texas State Capitol, it would be a harder case, but I believe it would still be unconstitutional because those tablets do convey a message that God --
 No, I'm just talking about when I -- I don't know if I used the word tablet. I'm just talking about a piece of stone or a 10 poster that says thou shalt not kill, thou shalt not 11 covet, thou shalt not bear false witness, et cetera. Would there be any Establishment Clause 13 objection simply because though it does not say so, those 14 were quotations from the last six commandments - last five commandments.
 No, Your Honor. If all 16 it said was thou shalt not kill and thou shalt not 17 steal, I don't think that that would be a problem 18 because, of course, those are a reflection of law.
 Who are you kidding? I 20 mean, everybody knows that comes from the Ten 21 Commandments. And what that message says is that 22 these commands that are engraved on the human heart 23 come from God. Why put it that way? You know, 24 instead of that, just quote the State statute against 25 murder. That's not what they're doing. They're saying these basic principles of human behavior that we're governed by come from God. And that message would be conveyed so long as you use the terminology of the Ten Commandments. That's what the Ten Commandments stand for.
 But Your Honor, this Court has emphasized that content and context matter enormously. And what I'm trying to do is to distinguish the situation where in Texas, it was clearly tablets with the words, I am the Lord, thy God, with five commandments for religious behavior and five for secular behavior. From Justice Souter's question, there are five others and especially those that are reflected in State law, like thou shalt not kill and thou shalt not steal. I think that the message is different there. It is the words, I am the Lord, thy God.
 I think you're telling us that the State cannot accommodate religion. The only way they can do it is to put the Ten Commandments up and insist that it's always secular, whether it's predominantly for a secular purpose. It seems to me that's hypocritical and it's asking religious people to surrender their beliefs and that is not accommodation.
 No, Your Honor. I do think that it degrades religion to have to have the Ten Commandments defended for their secular purpose. I do think, though, that what's required of the government, when it puts religious symbols on government property, is to not be endorsing religion. That's why a nativity scene by itself in the County of Allegheny case was unconstitutional. On the other hand, that's why the nativity scene as part of a unified display in Lynch v. Donnelly was permissible. That's why, if the Ten Commandments are part of an overall display like this frieze, it's permissible. If it's part of an overall display about religious tolerance, and that's what the reasonable observer would see, it is permissible. But where it is the Ten Commandments themselves, placed as they are here, then it really is about the government endorsing religion, then it is the purpose of advancing religion and then it does violate the Establishment Clause.
 So the word accommodate should not be within our jurisprudence?
 Accommodate should very much be in the jurisprudence. And any time there is a Free Exercise Clause claim, then there has to be careful attention to accommodating religion. But there is no Free Exercise Clause claim in this case, Your Honor, so this isn't a case about accommodating anybody's religious beliefs. This is about the State expressing support for religion with sacred and solemn religious texts on government property. And my position is --
 Can the State express its support for religion generally?
 Your Honor, it would all depend
 Suppose it didn't have the Ten Commandments, it just had a big thing that says religion is good. It said religion is the foundation of our institutions. Suppose there were something like that. Would that be bad?
 I don't think that would be a problem under the Establishment Clause because it's minimal --
 But there are atheists who disagree with that intensely.
 But Your Honor, I'm not arguing for a heckler's veto by atheists. What I am saying is that when the government puts sacred and solemn texts taken directly from the Bible at the core of its State government, it has to then do something to convey the message that it's not there for religious purposes, that it's there for secular purposes.
 Doesn't it matter whether that text has acquired an independent meaning of its own? As I say, I don't think most people know what the text of the Ten Commandments are, but they do know that it stands for the fact that our laws are derived from God. That's what it stands for. Why isn't that symbolism sufficient to enable the State of Texas to use it?
 The Ten Commandments monument by itself conveys the message that the Ten Commandments are the source of law and it's that message the State can't convey. May I save the rest of the time for rebuttal?
 Yes, you may save your time.
 Thank you.
 General Abbott, we'll hear for you, please.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Every court that has reviewed the specific facts of this case has agreed that the Texas monument is constitutional under this Court's well settled precedents in Lynch and Allegheny. This Court should agree that the Texas monument should not be torn down from its historical place for three reasons. First, the Ten Commandments is an historically recognized symbol of law. Second, this monument is one of the smallest of the 17 monuments on the Capitol grounds, and like most of the other monuments, was a gift to the State of Texas and is clearly recognized as such on the monument itself. And third, this monument has stood for more than 40 years without controversy on a national historic landmark. In fact, even the --
 May I ask you this question? Under your analysis of the reason this is justifiable, would it equally be permissible to have a crucifix of the same size in the same location on the Capitol grounds?
 Justice Stevens, I think that would pose a much greater problem.
 That's not my question. Do you think it would be permissible -- it seems to me your reasoning that you've given us would support that result. And maybe that's the correct result. I'm wondering what your view is.
 I seriously question whether or not a crucifix would be constitutionally acceptable in that same location, and for the very same reasons which I'm articulating why the Ten Commandments would be acceptable in this location. The crucifix is not like the Ten Commandments in that it's not an historically recognized symbol of law. It doesn't send a secular message to all the people, regardless of whether or not they are believers or not believers of the important role the Ten Commandments have played in the development of law.
 It's not a secular message. I mean, if you're watering it down to say that the only reason it's okay is it sends nothing but a secular message, I can't agree with you. I think the message it sends is that law is -- and our institutions come from God. And if you don't think it conveys that message, I just think you're kidding yourself.
 Well, Justice Scalia, the Ten Commandments send both a religious message and a secular message. When people --
 But the district court, I think in this very case, found that commemorating the Ten Commandments' role in the development of secular law was not one of the State's purposes in accepting the monument. Now, will you accept that finding as the case comes to us? That hasn't been challenged. We don't have any cross appeal. I assume we accept that finding of the district court.
 The Court obviously is correct to accept that finding. As you know, from the district court's finding, the secular purpose that was accepted by the district court was to honor the Fraternal Order of Eagles. But also there was an ongoing --
 But you're arguing for something contrary to the district court's finding.
 I'm actually, Justice O'Connor, arguing for purposes that are in addition to that district court's finding because there was an ongoing purpose to retain this now historical monument that has stood for more than 40 years without controversy on a national and historic landmark.
 So in another case, if a government official feels that the Ten Commandments have been very, very important in his or her life as a spiritual or religious matter and wants other people to know how important the Ten Commandments are, he cannot accept on behalf of the city the Ten Commandments. And so you can have no Ten Commandments in city A, but the Ten Commandments in city B. General, that doesn't make a lot of sense to me. And again, you're just doing with purpose what you did in response to Justice Scalia's question. You're asking us to ignore the religious purpose that is the most manifest value of these symbols.
 Well, with regard to both purpose and effect in this particular setting, I don't think that religion was the driving force. I know that all of the evidence shows that religion was not a driving force in any respect.
 I suppose that every monument that's on the State Capitol grounds in Texas in a sense conveys a message of State endorsement, State endorsement of the role of servicemen in fighting earlier wars or in support of the Boy Scouts or whatever it might be, doesn't it? I mean, by placing them there with the legislative approval, is that not really some kind of a message of endorsement for each one?
 If I may clarify an important fact and that is clearly the State of Texas, by displaying 17 monuments in a museum-like setting on the Capitol grounds, is trying to acknowledge and commemorate certain events. It's important for the Court to remember, though, that the State of Texas has specifically endorsed nine of those monuments by putting the State seal or the Lone Star seal for the State of Texas on those nine monuments. This monument does not have that kind of endorsement on there.
 Isn't it all the case, as has been pointed out, that no monument is going to be on the grounds of the Texas State Capitol without the approval of the legislature? You don't dispute that, do you?
 Not at all. That is very true.
 And you don't dispute that anyone going on those grounds would assume that the State government approved it or it wouldn't be there?
 Justice Souter, of course the presumption would be that people on the Capitol grounds would assume the State of Texas wanted those monuments on the Capitol grounds.
 Well, I'm not sure that that endorsement -- in England, there is a square where they have King Charles on one hand -- on one end and he's looking at Oliver Cromwell, who beheaded him, on the other. I don't know if you have to endorse one or the other.
 Well, Justice Kennedy, I believe that there is a very meaningful difference between this Court's standards of an endorsement and what a State or the nation may do with regard to commemoration. As an easy example, on the National Mall, there is, of course, the Lincoln Memorial and in the Lincoln Memorial, there is text from the King James version of the Bible. The nation commemorates and acknowledges Lincoln and what he has said. But by that display, the United States is not trying to endorse the King James version of the Bible or a particular religious message in that. Instead what the state
 But you have to contend with the fact that the district court found that this sort of commemoration of the Commandments involved was not the objective in placing the monument there, so you're left basically with a religious text. And if anybody has any doubt about that, the religious text is surrounded by some religious symbols, the Chi Rho, the Star of David. So it seems to me that it's hard to find, if we accept the district court findings, that there's anything here but an expression of approval by the State of Texas for a religious expression, and only for the religious expression.
 Sir, all other factors, though, Justice Souter, as a person who stands in front of that monument clearly recognizes, centered in a specialized scroll is an indication that this was a monument that was dedicated and presented to the people and the youth of the State of Texas by the Fraternal Order of Eagles. There is no stamp of approval on this by the State of Texas on that monument.
 But you're not trying to withdraw the -- I took it to be the concession that of course anyone would reasonably assume that the State of Texas approved this message, and thought it was appropriate to devote state property to its promulgation.
 Clearly the State of Texas approved of the monument being on the grounds --
 But then the fact that the Eagles also approve it doesn't really get us very far, does it?
 Well, where I believe it gets you, as this Court has recognized, there is a very meaningful difference between acknowledging something and endorsing something. For example, the creche in Lynch or the menorah in Allegheny.
 Let me ask you this. If the Eagles' presentation statement weren't on there, would that make a difference to Establishment Clause analysis?
 I think that the Eagles' disclaimer on there helps our case, but if it were not on there, I think the monument could still stand just as the creche did in Lynch or the menorah in Allegheny. The city of Pawtucket was not endorsing the creche in the display, it was acknowledged as part of the overall holiday celebration.
 What is the -- that's one of the problems with the argument, it seems to me, that by putting the Ten Commandments monument on grounds that have lots of other monuments, that the religious message is somehow either diluted or changed. Contrast the situation in Texas with what we've got here. You've got Moses up there with at least the last five commandments showing. But Moses is in the company of a group of individuals who are nothing but law givers. You've got Menes and Hammurabi and John Marshall and the rest of them. There is an obvious theme. Anybody who looks at the identity -- or knows the identity of these figures is saying they're getting at law givers. But if you look at the grounds of the Texas State Capitol, you see wars, pioneer women, children and so on. There is no one common theme. The only theme seems to be these are objects or symbols that are worthy of some kind of respect. And one of them is religious. Being mixed into a group that has no common theme does not eliminate the religious -- the obvious religious message from this monument. Isn't that correct?
 Well, just as this Court may display in the courtroom itself, Moses with the Ten Commandments amongst law givers, doesn't mean that that is the only way the Ten Commandments --
 Maybe it doesn't, but I'm trying to find a rationale for the argument that's being made, and that I thought you were alluding to. The argument is that by mixing this in with a grab bag of other symbols, you have somehow diluted or changed the focus from a religious message to something else. And I can understand that in the Moses case in the frieze because there is a clear common theme. On the Texas grounds, at least insofar as I can tell, there is no common theme. There are a series of objects that say, these are worthy of veneration. One of them is religious. There is nothing that removes the religious message from its prominence in the display the way the religious message is removed from prominence in the Moses display, isn't that correct?
 Your Honor, if I may explain with two points. One, there is a common theme on the Texas Capitol grounds, just as there are on most Capitol grounds and on the National Mall. And the common theme is to recognize historical influences in our country and in our State.
 But what do you do with the district court finding?
 Well, the district court finding obviously chose to decide that the secular purpose for the display was to honor the Fraternal Order of Eagles for their commitment to combating juvenile delinquency. But that is different -- the purpose why the district court found why the display was constitutional is different than the message that is being sent to the reasonable observer.
 You had a second point and I don't want to miss your second point.
 The second point is that there are other displays in this Court. As a person walks into this courtroom or exits the courtroom, they don't see the Ten Commandments in a display with a bunch of law givers. Instead, they see the Ten Commandments alone with an eagle above it.
 They see blank tablets. They don't see any writing. This is the only one that has script on it. It has numbers and in fact that's confusing because one of them, the people think is the Ten Commandments is the Bill of Rights. (Laughter.)
 Justice Ginsburg, clearly the Ten Commandments that are reflected on the doorway into and out of this courtroom don't have words on them like the tablets do in the State of Texas.
 But we know what they are, don't we?
 We do and that's the point. Even more importantly, the reasonable observer knows what --
 But do we know which version of the Ten Commandments it stands for? There are three different versions at least.
 I happen to agree with the Petitioner. There is more than three versions of the Ten Commandments. And the purpose, if you go back to what the Eagles were trying to achieve here, was to come up with a version of the Ten Commandments that wasn't reflective of any particular religion.
 And it doesn't matter what the version is, does it? If it just stands for the fact that laws -- the foundation of our laws is God. If that's all it stands for, who cares what the text is.
 General Abbott, would the Texas purpose be equally served if the monument had on it the kind of disclaimer that the city in Wisconsin put on its monument?
 Justice Stevens, I apologize, I'm not familiar with that disclaimer.
 It reads this way. What they did is they sold the parcel of land that had the Eagles' donation on it back to the Eagles and then they put a fence around it and then they put this sign up, "This property is not owned or maintained by the City of Lacrosse, nor does the City endorse the religious expression thereon." Maybe as long as it's still on the property, it couldn't be the same. But suppose you had a comparable disclaimer. Would that defeat any of the purposes on which you relied to justify having the statue there?
 A disclaimer like that would surely ensure that this display is constitutional. However, it's our contention --
 And would it undermine the message that you legitimately seek to convey?
 I don't believe it would.
 Well, why don't you do it and we wouldn't have this case? I really would consider it something of a Pyrrhic victory if you win on the ground that you're arguing. So that in all future cases, we're going to have to examine displays of the Ten Commandments to see whether there was ever any intent to say that our laws are ultimately dependent upon God. Is that what you want us to do case by case?
 Well, this Court obviously has decided Establishment Clause cases on a case-by-case basis, but in this particular instance, the Ten Commandments displayed in a museum-like setting on the Capitol grounds arrayed among 17 other monuments, the message that is received by the viewer who is trekking through the Capitol grounds looking at monuments is clearly one not of the State of Texas.
 I've got to get one question before you leave because you're the one who knows the record. And what I've had a hard time finding in the record is what I think there must be some material that the State or somebody in a tourist office or a guide or somebody tells people what the 17 different monuments are. And all I've found is the general brochure which doesn't tell them what they are. And I found something on the Internet. Well, which is in the record. But aside from this page from the Internet in the record and that, is there anything else in this record that if somebody wanders around, they're on the State grounds, they say, what is this, what are these things anyway? There must be something that tells them. And where is it?
 The state provides a walking tour guide.
 And the brochure doesn't tell what they are. This thing, it says grounds?
 Your Honor, Justice Breyer, if I could refer you to page 205 of the Joint Appendix, it provides a description of each of the monuments on the walking tour. And if I could also refer the Court to page 117 of the Joint Appendix, it shows the actual walking tour where a person would go along the process of seeing the monuments. But clearly as they walk through the Capitol grounds, what any observer, not just the reasonable observer, what any observer would notice is that before they could even get to this particular monument, they will have passed in full view of countless other monuments and historical markers clearly indicating to them that they are not there for the purpose of seeing just the Ten Commandments but they are in a museum-like setting cast among many different kinds of monuments. And so they appreciate the setting before they even arrive at the Ten Commandments monument. Also when they arrive at the Ten Commandments monument, they will notice it is one of the smallest of the monuments on the Texas Capitol grounds. It does have the disclaimer on it indicating that it was donated by the Fraternal Order of Eagles. It does not have the State seal on it like many of the other monuments, so it's not --
 Is it like how many other monuments? This is not peculiar to Texas. The Order of the Eagles have given how many monuments just like this one, identical to this one?
 Justice Ginsburg, it is actually not clear from the record. There have been some accounts of hundreds, maybe even into the thousands that the Fraternal Order of Eagles have given out. And I cannot tell you for a fact that they are all identical.
 When you said that every court that has considered this case has said it's compatible with the Establishment Clause, did you mean just this Texas case or other cases involving an Eagles Ten Commandments?
 Justice Ginsburg, my reference was to the fact that every case that has considered the specific -- every court that has considered the specific facts of this case, meaning the Texas case --
 So you didn't mean this particular depiction of the Ten Commandments?
 No, Your Honor. What I meant is that both the district court and the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals specifically reviewed the facts of this case and were all in complete agreement that the facts of this case render this monument constitutional under this Court's well settled precedents in Lynch and Allegheny. One other thing I would like to draw the Court's attention to that will give you a very well understanding of what the monument looks like and its setting is the videotape that is Exhibit 44, it's obviously not part of the Joint Appendix, but it demonstrates how this particular monument is set in a museum-like setting amongst many other monuments and gives you the perspective of what the typical viewer would appreciate as they walk around the Capitol grounds.
 Kind of an eclectic museum. One message that you get is that the State is honoring the donor of the various --
 General Abbott, I want to thank you for your argument and also for demonstrating that it's not necessary to stand at the lectern in order to a fine job. Thank you.
 Thank you, Your Honor.
 Mr. Clement.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The Ten Commandments have undeniable religious significance, but they also have secular significance as a code of law and as a well-recognized historical symbol of the law. When a State decides to display a Ten Commandments display along with more than a dozen other monuments on its Capitol grounds in order to honor the donor, it is not endorsing the religious text of the Ten Commandments. And in the same way, when a state has that monument as part of such a collection, the Establishment Clause should not be interpreted to force them to send a message of hostility to religion by singling out that one monument for removal solely because of its religious content.
 Mr. Clement, can I ask you to address one thing that troubles me about the case? As I understand it, it's the Protestant version basically of the Ten Commandments we have before us, which has significant differences from the Catholic version and the Jewish version. And I understand it was the result of consultation and so forth. But I noticed in your brief, you list the States in which the Ten Commandments displays are listed, there is none for Rhode Island, which I often think of as primarily a Catholic state, and the only one from Massachusetts is a frieze on the north wall of the public library which apparently didn't have the text of the commandments in it. Is there any significance to the fact that this kind of display may be more popular in areas of the country where the Protestant religion is dominant as opposed to other versions of Christian religions?
 Justice Stevens, I don't think so. I mean, we didn't purport to do an exhaustive survey, but I think there is a well-represented group of displays throughout the country including, I think, in States that probably have relatively high Catholic populations. But I think we would steer this Court away from attributing too much significance to the fact that if a State is going to display the Ten Commandments at all, it will necessarily have to display a version that reflects one or another sect's preferences. I mean, in the Marsh case, for example, this Court upheld legislative prayer. It understood that they would necessarily have to choose a chaplain and that chaplain would necessarily be of one denomination or another. And this Court didn't doom the whole practice of legislative prayer because of the necessity of picking a chaplain of one denomination or another. In fact, in the Marsh case itself, this court upheld Nebraska's practice, even though they had chosen the same Presbyterian minister for 16 straight years. And so I don't think this Court in other Establishment Clause contexts has steered away from putting the States and municipalities in a catch-22. And given that this Court has suggested even in Stone against Graham that the Ten Commandments can be displayed, can be used in certain settings, it can't be that once the State in practice picks a particular version, it's all of a sudden guilty of a sectarian preference.
 Of course, the other thing that was notable about your listing is most of the examples are examples of displays of the event itself rather than the text. And there is an argument made I think by Professor Laycock that when you display the entire text, it's kind of a different sort of symbol than when you just have a symbolic presentation.
 Well, Justice Stevens, I think there are quite a few of both types of displays and I think the very fact that the Fraternal Order of Eagles put a lot of these displays out suggests that a bunch of them are textual displays. I'm not sure, though, that a display that actually has Moses receiving the Ten Commandments from God is any less religious. I would suggest that's actually more religious than one that just displays the monument standing alone. If the monuments are standing alone, you can I think appreciate the fact that maybe they're being displayed for their secular significance as well as their religious significance. When Moses is there, it's hard to avoid the implication that they are the revealed law of God, as opposed to also a secular code. So in that sense, I'm not sure that the variations in the display --
 You think just a symbolic display is less objectionable than quoting the text as this monument does?
 Well, Justice Stevens, I would say -- my point is not that there are not other ways to display it. I mean, certainly I think, as we point out in our brief, blank tablets or tablets with Roman numerals are less objectionable -- certainly, I don't think they're beyond objection -- than a textual display. My point was that I'm not quite sure how one would balance sort of four Commandments and Moses versus all Ten Commandments in text. I think it's a close call.
 Well, except the four Commandments and Moses would avoid the differences between the three different versions of the Ten Commandments, whereas when you quote one, you must select one over the other two.
 Well, I guess I'm not sure that's true. I mean, some of the displays that are out there in courthouses have Moses receiving the Commandments and have text. And I guess, my point, though, would be, again --
 Most of them don't.
 To be sure, to be sure. But I would hope the constitutional line wouldn't be that you can't have text. I mean, the Ten Commandments have a role in our society and had an influence on the development of the law as text. I mean, you know, they weren't influential with ten Roman numbers. They were influential as text.
 General Clement, there is a question I have about the government's position. And does place matter at all? I mean, here we're talking about the grounds surrounding a State Capitol. What about every school room, if that's the choice of the school board? Is it the same or do you make -- or every courtroom up to the court to decide for itself?
 Well, Justice Ginsburg, I certainly think location and context matters. I think in almost every Establishment Clause context, the setting and context matters a great deal. The school case, for example, as you suggest, I mean, unless this Court is going to revisit Stone against Graham, it's certainly true that the school context at least raises much more difficult questions. In terms of where it can be displayed in a courthouse, I think there are certainly permissible displays in the courthouse, but it may be something all together different to have a display in a way that it actually looks like a religious sanctuary within the walls of the courthouse.
 It looks just like this monument. Let's take this monument and put it in the rotunda of the court because the judges of that court choose to have it there. Is that all right?
 Justice Ginsburg, I think putting it in the rotunda of the court as a stand-alone monument, giving it sort of pride of place, if you will, raises a much more difficult question, to be sure, and may well cross the constitutional line. As I was alluding to, the one case I'm familiar with, which is the case of the Alabama Supreme Court, there it was displayed in a way that the district court literally found it was like a religious sanctuary within the walls of the courthouse.
 And do you think that it should cross the constitutional line under the interpretational theory of the First Amendment you wish us to adopt?
 I think the display that I have in mind in the Alabama Supreme Court probably does cross the constitutional line even under our view. I think that a display of the Ten Commandments in some appropriate way in the courthouse certainly wouldn't cross the line that this Court -- that we would have this Court draw. I mean, we think, for example, it cannot be that the very fact that moving it closer to the courthouse itself is a constitutional problem because as you yourself have pointed out, Justice Kennedy, the legislative prayers that were approved in Marsh v. Chambers were at the absolute epicenter of the government. And still those were a permissible acknowledgment of religion. So I think while context matters, I don't think solely the fact that it's moved closer to the seat of government does have a dispositive impact. And again, I would say in response to Justice Stevens' question, I do think it is important to remember that there is going to have to be a choice among the various documents if they are going to be displayed at all. And I don't think that the Constitution puts the municipalities and the States in the bind of being able to display the Ten Commandments in theory, but in fact, not being able to pick any one version --
 What would your comment be on requiring a disclaimer of some kind?
 Well, Justice Stevens, two points to make about that. One is certainly a disclaimer would make this an easier case. And I would point out that there is a disclaimer of sorts on the monument already because it clearly states that it was a gift from the Fraternal Order of Eagles.
 It is kind of ambiguous.
 It is, Justice Stevens, and I'm troubled frankly by the suggestion that they would have to go as far as you suggested they would go under the City of Lacrosse case. The idea that in order to have the Ten Commandments monument on the Capitol grounds, the State of Texas has to cordon that monument off, unlike any other of the 17 monuments, suggests a hostility to religion. I think the idea that there has to be a fence away from the Ten Commandments to make clear that the State has nothing to do with the Ten Commandments is bending over too far in the other direction. The State can have, as this Court has acknowledged many times, permissible acknowledgments of religion. And I don't think in this case that the State of Texas has gone too far. One other point I think that is important to put on the table, and it is consistent with the analysis of both the district court and the Fifth Circuit, is that whatever the original purpose is for Texas accepting the monument and displaying it in the first instance, they now have an additional secular purpose in retaining the monument. And I would point this Court to Judge Becker's analysis in the Chester County case for the Third Circuit. In that case, he had a display that was admittedly smaller, but it was actually a much more overtly sectarian version of the Ten Commandments. It had the Ten Commandments plus the summary of the Ten Commandments from the New Testament. And nonetheless, Judge Becker said that in that case, the monument had been there since 1920 and Chester County had a legitimate secular purpose in maintaining that document and maintaining the plaque on the courthouse. And I think he correctly understood that in these cases of displays that have stood for 40 years or longer, that the State is in something of a dilemma. Thank you, Your Honor.
 Mr. Chemerinsky, you have four minutes left.
 Thank you. This case comes down to two questions. First, is the Ten Commandments a highly religious message. And second, can the government place a single religious message on government property at the seat of its government. As to the first question, Stone v. Graham resolves this because this Court said that the Ten Commandments is an inherently religious message no matter what disclaimer accompanies it. The Ten Commandments is not on the Texas State Capitol grounds simply to recognize the role of religion in government. It is not simply an acknowledgment. It is sacred text taken directly from the Bible. It's not there about the history of religion in Texas. There is nothing that would tell the reasonable observer that it is there for historical purposes. It isn't there for history. What about all the other religions that have played a role in Texas history? The Muhammad religion, even Madeleine Murray O'Hare. Is Texas saying they would accept statues for all of these individuals there as part of the history of Texas? The second question is, can the government place a single religious message by itself on government property, especially at the seat of government. The County of Allegheny case resolves that. This is much like the nativity scene at the seat of the county government. What's important and hasn't gotten enough emphasis this morning, this is the sole religious message anywhere on the Texas State Capitol grounds. This isn't a museum. Every item that's there is there because the Texas legislature chose to put it there. Most of them honor veterans of particular wars. Texas put this there precisely to express the religious message. Your Honors, what's left of the Establishment Clause if any item can be displayed with the most profound religious contents? Do we then say the observer can just avert his or her eyes? The observer could have averted his or her eyes in the County of Allegheny case. But this Court was clear in saying that a single religious message, a single religious symbol on government property is inherently an establishment of religion. For this reason, the Texas monument violates the Establishment Clause. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Chemerinsky. The case is submitted.
 We will now hear argument in Orff against the United States. Mr. Smiland.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The relevant language of the 1963 contract, as illuminated in the surrounding circumstances, was confirmed in the express terms of the 1986 stipulated judgment which commanded the district and the United States to perform the contract. In particular, the first sentence of paragraph 4.2, which is at joint appendix page 111, states -- and I quote -- the district acknowledges that it entered into the 1963 contract for the benefit of Areas 1A and 1B. That's the premerger --
 Mr. Smiland, do you mind telling us why the petitioners never filed suit in the Court of Federal Claims?
 Yes, Your Honor. There's a long history of litigation here. It began with the first suit in 1979. We were in the district court there. There were administrative and constitutional and equitable issues as well, and we were able in that initial case to combine all those forms of relief in the district court. And then, of course, we got this judgment that I began to read from. And from then on, we had four or five other cases all in the district court. We do acknowledge that on the breach of contract, there is concurrent jurisdiction under the Tucker Act.
 Is it concurrent? I mean, the -- the statute I'm reading, the one you brought is consent is given to join the United States as a necessary party defendant. Is that what happened here? They were joined as a necessary party defendant?
 Well, we think so, Your Honor.
 They were? I -- I think that's -- isn't that -- what rule of -- I thought there's a -- a Rule of Federal Procedure. I can't remember what -- what's the --
 Rule 19(s)?
 Yes. Is that what they were joined under?
 That -- that procedure was not invoked here.
 No. Well, all right. Were they -- there's technical phrase well known in the law to be joined as a necessary party defendant. Given the normal meaning in the law of that technical phrase, is that what happened here?
 No. What happened -- what happened --
 No, okay. If it did not happen, then how could you possibly sue in that court rather than the Court of Claims where the statute says you can sue on any implied, as well as express, contract?
 Because the waiver of sovereign immunity statute says in any suit.
 It doesn't mean in any suit in sentence 2 of the kind referred to in sentence 1? Does it mean any suit in the universe? Any suit in the world? Any tort suit? I would have thought that sentence 2 refers to sentence 1.
 Well, it -- it does and that case was litigated against the United States by my clients and -- and we won in the Peck case. And we think that should have ended the matter.
 But don't -- how can we, if we have -- if -- if I read this -- this as meaning technically what it says and it's a jurisdictional matter, how could I do anything other than say, go to the Court of Claims, you're in the wrong court?
 Any suit is also in the first sentence, Your Honor.
 Yes. It says --
 And -- and --
 -- in any suit you can join the United States as a necessary party.
 The -- the -- in the sue and be sued cases, this Court construes that very broadly, and this is the same root word and --
 Well, but we don't give broad construction to waivers of sovereign immunity.
 I --
 Quite the reverse. And it says to join the U.S. as a necessary party defendant in a suit to adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree the contractual rights of a contracting entity in the United States regarding any contract executed pursuant. Now, I guess the farmers were not technically the contracting entity.
 They were not the signing --
 No.
 -- party.
 So you've got more problems.
 Our -- our argument -- and again, this has been resolved in the lower courts against the Government. But our -- our view is that by the nature of the intended beneficiary doctrine, the duty is owed to the third party, as well as to the promisee, and it's enforceable by the third party, as well as the promisee.
 If you -- if the lower courts were of this view, why did the district court in this case give you three opportunities to have your contract claim transferred to the Claims Court?
 Once the determination was made that we were not intended third party beneficiaries, that was the law of the case, and had it been transferred to the Claims Court, we -- we would have been bound by that determination. We felt we had to bring to a final resolution the -- the intended beneficiary issue before we could proceed in the Claims Court either.
 But it does suggest that the district court had at least some concern whether the case -- your claim had been lodged in the right court.
 Yes, although again that -- that court had been hearing these matters for many years in -- in numerous cases without this issue ever having come up.
 Well, but it's a -- see, I want to know what I'm supposed to do. As I read the language, you're out. As I understand the purpose of the statute, it makes sense to me if you're out, and it doesn't make sense to me if you're in. And maybe there's some lower court precedent to the contrary, which I'd certainly read, but is there any Supreme Court precedent to the contrary that supports you?
 Just the -- the language of in any suit definitely is --
 No, no. But that isn't the limiting part. The limiting part is in any suit of a certain kind.
 Yes.
 What they give consent to is joinder as a necessary party. And that is not what happened here.
 Only the -- the general principle that language should be read in its ordinary meaning --
 It's ordinary meaning, you're out because the ordinary meaning of joinder as a necessary party is you weren't joined as a --
 There -- there at least is no evidence that Congress had rule 19 in mind when it enacted either the '52 statute or the '82 statute that we -- we stand on.
 Well, it's something that I hadn't concentrated on before now, but your position that, well, if you're transferred to the Court -- to the Court of Claims, that you bring with you all of the previous rulings of the United States district court in California and that those are somehow binding because of the law of the case -- what is the authority for that? The -- the court that's transferred has to accept all the rulings that have been made previous to the transfer?
 I -- our understanding is if, obviously --
 I mean, what's the authority for that?
 I can't cite you authority, Your Honor, but I -- we were very concerned about that. If there was no waiver of sovereign immunity in the first instance, then the lower court's ruling on intended third party beneficiary I would think should be vacated.
 Could I -- I -- I guess I'm not following this. I don't know why, Mr. Smiland, you -- you have not referred to the last sentence of -- of what you assert was the waiver of sovereign immunity, which says any suit pursuant to this section may be brought in any United States district court in the State in which the land involved is situated. Why isn't that what you're relying on?
 It is and -- and when I was talking about in any suit --
 How does that help you? Because it says any suit pursuant to this section, and of course, this section starts off by talking about addition of a person as a necessary party. So how does the last sentence help you?
 I -- I --
 Well, it -- it -- if the words, join necessary, limit any suit and the language that Justice Scalia referred to, then -- then maybe we're in trouble. But otherwise --
 I -- I take that to mean that when you sue one defendant and you also sue the United States as a necessary party defendant, that suit -- any -- that would be a suit pursuant to this section. I -- I don't know what other meaning that -- that sentence could have. When you sue two parties, one of whom is the United States, by reason of the fact that it's a necessary party defendant, that suit is a suit pursuant this section and it can be brought in any United States district court in the State in which the land involved is situated. I -- I don't know what -- what other suit that -- that sentence could refer to.
 You -- you agree with that. I -- you're caught in between us here, and I understand. (Laughter.)
 And I guess we have to figure out what is the right meaning of that initial phrase.
 Perhaps you can explain. This was not your suit originally. You intervened. Right? This was started out by the water district.
 The district sued the United States. We intervened.
 And then after some, I think, 2 years --
 Yes.
 -- the water district bows out. It has settled its case. It's a mystery what it settled for. At least, I didn't see it in any of the briefs. Why did the water district, having brought this case, then say, we're satisfied, we're out?
 The record is very sparse, Your Honor. There is the district's motion which says pretty much what it said in its brief, that there was a -- a thing called the principles between it and the United States and various parties. And as a result of those principles, which are not in the record, although they are a matter of public record, the -- the district in its discretion elected to dismiss the case. We opposed that. We would have hoped the district would have kept going. We lost that opposition. The district was dismissed, and we were allowed to proceed on our own.
 Mr. Smiland, can I ask this question? If Justice Breyer is -- the thrust of his question is right, I -- I think the district itself could not have brought the suit under his reading of the sovereign immunity. And I'm just wondering, has the United States ever taken the position that the district could not have initiated this litigation?
 Not to my knowledge, Your Honor.
 Could -- could we hear your argument on -- on the sovereign immunity point as opposed to the venue point? What -- on what ground do you say the United States has waived its -- its immunity from suit in this case?
 There are two statutes.
 May -- may we just back up to the question -- your answer to Justice Stevens? I thought that this wasn't a suit initially on the part of the water district for money damages. I thought they were seeking declaratory relief against the United States.
 They pled both, Your Honor. Although at that time the water still was available for delivery, it hadn't flowed to the ocean. And the money had not yet been collected and spent. So the focus initially was on equitable relief to stop --
 Because one could -- one could read the words, suit to adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree the contractual rights, as a suit for declaratory relief but not encompassing damages.
 Both statutes we cite say that judgments can be entered in the same manner, to the same extent as a private individual under like circumstances, language I believe from the Federal Tort Claims Act. Again, both in the 491 F.Supp. decision under the McCarran Act and in the Peck case, the district court held that money damages were encompassed by that. So both statute -- statutes on which we rely have language in it taken from other sources of law, with which this Court is very familiar and has opined on several times. The -- the only unique parts of -- of either of the two statutes that we stand on are -- are the rights. One refers to administering a previously adjudicated right to the use of water, and the other is the contract language we've discussed.
 Can you turn to sovereign immunity now?
 Yes.
 And -- and let me make -- make it easy for you. Do you know of any case, other than cases decided by this friendly district judge, in which a suit has been allowed against the United States based on nothing more than the status as a third party beneficiary of a contract to which the United States has -- on which the United States has agreed to be sued? Is -- is there any such case?
 No.
 And -- and you think it's clear that -- as our sovereign immunity law requires, that such a third party beneficiary can sue the United States?
 For example, in the U.S. v. District Court case decided by this Court in 1971, under the McCarran Act, that fact situation was not before you, but the Court did say that the rights to which the statute referred were all inclusive. It read it broadly.
 I -- I don't understand that. The rights were all inclusive. As -- as I understand the law of third party beneficiaries, it -- it used to be -- and -- and perhaps at the time this statute was enacted still was -- quite -- quite restrictive. It's only in more recent -- I don't agree with the Government's argument that -- that you have to, in an ordinary contract, explicitly refer to the third party beneficiary's rights. But when sovereign immunity is at issue, it's -- it's a different question, it seems to me.
 Well, we have explicit rights here and -- and it would seem to me that if -- if -- and this was certainly the legislative history behind section 221, not -- not behind McCarran. But if -- if the same duty is owed by the promisor to the third party that it owes to the promisee, and if the third party has the same rights of enforcement as it does under 304 of the Restatement that the promisee would have, why should it be any different? Why would Congress have intended to exclude that? And it used the word contract.
 Because -- because we have a rule that says when Congress wants the United States to be sued, it -- it must say so clearly.
 You also have the rule that the word contract means the law of contract and not parts of it.
 But yes, isn't it arguable, though, that in this case the Government probably thought that it would be efficient to have the district represent all the farmers for whatever their -- to the extent their interests were shared with one another, rather than having every individual have the same right to bring -- bring a lawsuit?
 Efficient in -- in collecting land assessments and water charges, but there's no evidence in the -- either the language of the statute, I submit, or the --
 Except for the fact that the district is the party to the contract, though.
 Nothing was said about litigation, let alone intended third party beneficiary --
 Well, but the -- the whole point of the district -- correct if I'm wrong. This is your area. The whole point of the district was to make it easier for the United States to know with whom it was dealing to have an efficient system, and if you say, well, that doesn't include lawsuits for damages, it seems to me that destroys much of the purpose of the formation of the district.
 There's a lot of legislative history there, and it talks a great deal, as you say, Your Honor, about efficiency and -- and the convenience. But it's not talking at all about litigation, about remedies, about rights once there's a breach.
 But you haven't really achieved very much efficiency if you simply get the United States out of the business of collecting the payments and of keeping track of the payments but leave the United States subject to suit when the person who has authority to do -- do these things goofs. I mean, what -- what trouble has the United States saved itself? It would still have to ride herd over -- over the person with -- with whom it's dealing.
 Well, it -- this is a transaction between a water seller and many water buyers. Yes, in 1926 districts were put in the middle, but it's also true in 1939 in -- in the section 9(e), Congress authorized the particular type of contracts we have here, so-called water service contracts, and it doesn't mention district. And as a matter of fact, the Ninth Circuit has held that the bureau had the discretion administratively to deal with individuals. So throughout the history of the reclamation program, you -- you have the -- the core transaction is -- is a water sale from the Government to -- to farmers. And that's was the case on day one in 1902 and it still is. And I'd just like to remind the Court that paragraph 3 of the stipulated judgment at page 110 of the joint appendix is in our view dispositive here. This was a -- an agreement by the United States and the district, approved by a court after formal settlement notice was dispatched to two formal classes, and it says, any appropriate relief may be obtained against the Federal parties by the filing of a new action for violation of any contract arising independently of this judgment.
 But the -- the Justice Department has no authority to -- to consent to suit which -- which Congress has not consented to. I don't see how this strengthens your case.
 Again, if -- if this Court should hold that neither of the two statutes on -- on which we stand waive sovereign immunity, and --
 And this alone wouldn't -- wouldn't remedy the --
 Then -- then --
 -- the absence --
 -- the decision that we're not intended beneficiaries should be vacated and we should have a chance to go to the court -- Claims Court. I'd like to reserve, Your Honor, 3 minutes, if I may.
 You may, indeed, Mr. Smiland. Mr. Minear, I think you're up next.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Petitioners cannot maintain this suit for breach of the Westlands contract because the Westlands contract is itself subject to the rules of sovereign immunity. And section 390uu authorizes only a limited waiver of sovereign immunity. It does not authorize suits by incidental beneficiaries for money damages. For many of the points that have already been raised by Justice Breyer, Justice Kennedy --
 Mr. Minear, do you think it does waive sovereign immunity for suits brought by the district?
 In one circumstance, Your Honor. This suit allows a district that has been sued by individual water users to join the United States in the ongoing suit and, in fact, remove the case to Federal court if necessary, so there can be a determination of all the rights in those --
 Did this suit begin as a suit by a water user against the district and then you were joined later? Is that --
 No, it did not, but that did occur in the Barcellos & Wolfsen litigation that ran between 1978 and 1980.
 Well, in this suit, did not the district bring it against the United States?
 That's correct.
 And was that a -- was that jurisdiction proper at that time?
 That suit was brought under the APA, and the district brought the suit on that basis.
 But was it properly brought is what I'm asking you.
 That suit was properly brought.
 Okay.
 But it was not brought under 390uu. Instead, there was an allegation that the United States had acted unlawfully and the Westlands relied on the Administrative Procedure Act.
 And no money damages.
 And no money damages as well, and that's what distinguishes this case.
 So that -- so your view -- I mean, what -- what makes sense to me is that the section means what it says, that consent is given to join the United States. That means join them in an ongoing suit. And it makes sense because what the United States wants is anyone who sues them for money damages goes to the Court of Claims. But of course, where you have an ongoing suit between two other people, we'll make an exception because there it's already in another district and we'll let you bring the United States in as a necessary party. The other exception is when you don't sue for money damages. That's in section 702 of the APA. Now, that to me makes a lot of sense and it's consistent with the language. Is that your view or do you have a different view?
 Yes, that is our view, and let me supplement your comments in this regard. Section --
 May I -- may I -- has that always been your view throughout? (Laughter.)
 It has been our view under 390uu when section 390uu has been -- has been raised.
 But throughout the litigation?
 Throughout this litigation? I can't -- I can't be sure that we've maintained a consistent position, but ultimately this is a question of sovereign immunity. So the importance is that we get the issue right here.
 There has to be an ongoing suit. You think this section does -- does not permit somebody to initiate suit against one party and at the same time against the United States as a necessary party.
 Your Honor, let me explain why that's the case, and there was an answer --
 Why what is the case?
 Why there's a necessity for an ongoing suit.
 You -- that is to say, there's a suit between only two individuals and then the United States is brought in.
 Your Honor, this -- this provision was enacted in response to a specific problem that's illustrated by the Barcellos & Wolfsen litigation. Individual farmers sued an irrigation district. The irrigation district was concerned that it might be subject to inconsistent liability to the farmers on the one hand and the Federal Government on the other, and it sought to join the United States. There was no mechanism in 1978 for that type of suit. Congress acted --
 I understand that. That's one situation that this provision could cover, but there are other situations that this provision could -- could cover. Let's say a farmer wants to bring suit against the district, but it doesn't really know whether the fault is with the district or whether the district was -- was compelled to do what it did by the United States. So it sues the district and just in case the United States was -- was responsible, it joins the United States. Why doesn't the language entirely permit that kind of a suit?
 The language could be construed to allow that, but -- but waivers of sovereign immunity are construed narrowly, and the language I think is more properly construed, as Justice Breyer has suggested, to allow joinder as a necessary party. And in fact, it was enacted in specific reaction to that problem in the Barcellos & Wolfsen litigation where we did have ongoing litigation and there was a sense by the irrigation district they needed to join the United States so they would not be subject to inconsistent suits. So although I think that the language can bear the -- the interpretation that you're suggesting, Justice Scalia, nevertheless, I think the better interpretation is the more narrow one that is --
 Then -- then how do you explain the last -- the last sentence of that provision, which is any suit pursuant to this section? The only suit that the section refers to is a suit in which the United States is joined as a necessary party defendant. That's the subject of the section.
 Yes, and --
 And -- and the last sentence says, any suit pursuant to this section may be brought in any United States district court. And I read that to mean if you want to sue the United States as a necessary party initiating a suit, you can bring it in -- in any district court in which the land involved is.
 Your Honor, we read that as allowing removal in those circumstances when the United States is joined later. In any event, I have to say that with regard to -- to this disagreement, it does -- it's not dispositive or even affect the case here. The fact is that this waiver of sovereign immunity under no circumstances would allow this suit to go forward. Apart from the money damages aspect, which itself is -- is -- would preclude this type of suit, these parties are not intended beneficiaries, and without being intended beneficiaries, there's -- in no circumstances could they ever evoke these provisions.
 Mr. Minear, when you say -- when you say not money damages, do you read the words that I read to Mr. Smiland restrictively or do you think they accommodate money damages, that is, suit to adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree the contractual rights of a contracting entity?
 We think that under your cases, such as Pena v. Lane, there needs to be a specific reference to money damages. This simply is referencing declaratory relief, and so we do not believe it would allow an award of money damages. Rather, the party must go to the Claims Court if they're seeking money damages. And in fact, the waiver of sovereign immunity there is somewhat broader. It does, as mentioned before, allow implied or express contracts. So this suit is simply in the wrong court. But I would like to --
 So money damages -- waiver always used the word money damages. When it says adjudicate the rights under the contract, that doesn't include money damages?
 No, I do not think in this context it would. I think there needs to be something more specific. We're really talking about declaring rights here and not providing a specific remedy. And this Court has always taken the view that the Claims Court jurisdiction is the appropriate forum for deciding money damages.
 What about the second sentence?The United States, when a party, shall be deemed to have waived any right to plead that it is not amenable thereto by reason of its sovereignty and shall be subject to judgments, orders, and decrees of the court having jurisdiction and may obtain review thereof in the same manner and to the same extent? It's subject to the judgments, orders, and decrees of the court to the same extent as a private individual under like circumstances. Why isn't that enough to -- to say that the court can -- can award damages?
 Your Honor, I think that simply refers back to the previous sentence, which refers to adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree. Now, if you interpret that to include money damages, then the second sentence would follow, but I -- I think the two have to be construed together. And in our view simply allowing a party to adjudicate, confirm, validate, or decree in these circumstances would not allow award of money damages. Certainly I think Congress would be much clearer.
 Yes, but if contractual rights include a right to be paid for something, why wouldn't you get a money judgment in a case like that? That first sentence certainly covers the possibility of a contractual right to be paid something.
 Your Honor, again, waivers of sovereign immunity are construed narrowly. Now, let's --
 That's pretty clear language.
 -- I have to say that the language -- you're saying that the language -- yes, could it conceivably be -- be interpreted in -- on -- that broadly. But that's not --
 Certainly if it were not a -- a United States and were a private individual, it would include money damages.
 That might well be, but this is --
 And -- and the next sentence, as Justice Scalia points out, says the United States shall be treated just like a private party.
 Yes. But Your Honor, ultimately I think that we have to focus on that this is a waiver of sovereign immunity. And -- and so far we have not touched on the question of whether these parties --
 Well, I think you've got a very strong argument when you talk about an incidental third party beneficiary not being a contracting party, but now you're asking for a much broader holding than really necessary to dispose of this case, it seems to me.
 Your Honor, I think I started with that point, that an incidental beneficiary cannot invoke this -- this provision. And I'd like to -- to continue with that point because the party here is merely an incidental beneficiary and not an intended beneficiary. Under any of the -- the tests that have been applied for third party beneficiaries, the party here would not qualify as an intended beneficiary. Most importantly, the contracting parties here, the United States and Westlands, expressed no intent to give this party enforcement rights. What's more, the contract does not provide that performance would be rendered to -- to the petitioners in this case. The contract is quite clear that performance is rendered to Westlands. This is a contract in which the United States furnishes a specified amount of water to Westlands and Westlands pays money for it. Westlands then has a separate obligation with regard to the farmers.
 Separate from -- where does that -- that obligation come from?
 That arises from the regulations that the Westlands Water District has enacted that provides for the delivery of water from Westlands to the individual farmers. The United States' obligation --
 That's a State -- a State created obligation?
 That's right. That is -- and Westlands has the -- has the option of either engaging in contracts with the individual farmers or distributing the water through regulation, and it has opted for regulations. Now, Westlands itself is a governmental unit. It is comprised of the -- of the very farmers here, among others, who have brought this suit. And it has the authority to act in a representative capacity on behalf of all its members. And that is why the United States enters into contracts with irrigation districts precisely because it allows them to reach accord and agreement and to resolve their disputes. Now, the fact is that the United States and Westlands agree on a great many things. Sometimes they disagree, but when we disagree, we're able to -- to speak to one another as two governments representing constituencies and hammer out our differences. And that would be impossible if these types of third party beneficiary suits were allowed. And I think that goes to the crux of what the United States' real concern here is. When there are contracts between one government and another, just as in the context of treaties or compacts among the States, it's vital that the two governmental units be able to deal with one another as governments and to be assured that if they can reach accord on behalf of their representatives -- on behalf of the parties they represent, that that will resolve the issue. If it were otherwise, this type of distribution of water --
 Well, you don't take the position, do you, that Westlands could have agreed with the United States that it wouldn't enforce its new laws that deprived the farmers of water? You don't take that position.
 But let's look at what would happen, Your Honor, if that did happen. The individual farmers would sue Westlands, claiming that Westlands was not living up to its contract obligations. Westlands would invoke 390uu and join the United States in that suit. And the question of the legal rights would be determined on that basis. So the mechanism that -- that we've specified and the way that we interpret it deals precisely with the problem that you've -- you've addressed.
 Yes, but you can't -- the -- presumably the Federal Government can't negotiate away the Endangered Species Act or something. The fact is that new laws were passed after these contracts were entered into with Westlands. Isn't that right?
 That's correct. And again, I think it's instructive to see what happened in this case. When those laws were enacted, the United States reacted to those. Westlands brought a suit under the APA challenging the interpretation of the statutes. Westlands was entitled to do that under the APA. The United States and Westlands reached an accord, together with the environmental intervenors in this group, that was satisfactory to those parties. And it simply would be very disruptive of the system if a minority of farmers in the Westlands District could then bring a suit and upset that agreement and that accord that had been reached. Finally, I'd like to make a brief --
 Can the district get damages from the Government?
 Technically yes, but their damages are limited by the terms of the contract. Westlands could sue the United States in Claims Court for a breach of the contract, but the contract itself says that any damages that are -- that the sole liability of the United States in these circumstances would be an adjustment of the account. In other words, there are not consequential damages. Rather, if we do not provide Westlands with the water that Westlands believes it's entitled to, then we stand liable for an adjustment in the payments that Westlands would make to us. The suit that is being brought here is asking for consequential damages, and we believe that the contract here does not allow consequential damages. That, of course, is a merits question that there's no need for the Court to reach, but that is the way it would be resolved in Claims Court in -- in our view. I'd like to also raise the question of property rights since that has -- has come up, that one of the arguments that has been made by Westlands is that they're entitled to status of a third party beneficiary because they claim they have water rights in these circumstances. The fact is that the United States, the State of California, and Westlands, as well as the California Water Resources Board and the first tier of California courts, have all concluded they do not have the -- the water rights that they claim. But in any event, our view is that that issue is irrelevant to the inquiry here. Rather, the question of third party beneficiary status turns on the intent of the contracting parties. Did they or did they not intend to give enforceable rights to the third party? Here there's not a shred of evidence that that was an intent -- there was an intent to create enforceable rights in that third party. Quite to the contrary. The only reference of third parties, the farmers, in the contract here is directed to limitations on what the district can do once it receives its water. It doesn't create rights in them -- the individual farmers. Quite to the contrary. What it does it restricts the ability of the district in order to protect the United States' interests, to make sure the United States will be paid for the water that it ultimately provides to the district. The central point that I would like to leave you with, though, here at the end is the importance of protecting the relationship between the United States and Westlands. But although we disagree on some matters, we are able to reach accommodation and agreement, and when we're able to do that, it's to the good of all concerned. The contracts and the laws here are structured to allow those types of agreements to be reached, and we think that allowing third party beneficiary suits would be very disruptive of that -- that operation.
 Thank you, Mr. Minear. Mr. Somach, will you tell us what the district's views on this whole matter are?
 Yes, Your Honor. Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Westlands Water District has argued in its brief that petitioners are not intended third party beneficiaries with enforceable rights under the 1963 contract. I want to make two points from the perspective of the district why this must be so. First, allowing a direct right of action by petitioners is not practical or consistent with the district's need and ability to function as a governmental entity and to allocate all of the water that it receives under contract to all of the landowners within the -- the district. This is a scarce and valuable resource, and these types of third party lawsuits jeopardize the district's ability to be able to provide water pursuant to California Water Code provisions to all of the landowners within the district. Second, the laws of the State of California and reclamation law, working in harmony one with the other --
 Excuse me. Could you expand on the first point a little bit? I mean, you say you don't want to be bothered with lawsuits. Is -- is that -- is that all that it amounts to?
 No. I -- I think quite on the contrary. You know, and unfortunately, the -- the history of this contract and these -- these issues has been anything other than the district avoiding litigation. The -- the whole concept of a water district is not to individualize or incrementalize the water and interests in water in any one group of landowners or any one landowner. The idea is that the rights of all of the landowners to all of the water under the contract are to be treated as a whole and allow the district to provide protection to all of the landowners within the district as a whole, the point there being that the water doesn't belong to any one landowner or a group of landowners. It belongs to the whole. And in fact, the way the district operates, the way it has to operate is in the context of the whole. Bonds are issued. Encumbrances on lands are -- are incurred, all based upon not individual rights to water but rather broad rights of water throughout the district. To allow a small group of landowners to decide how to administer the contract, how to enforce the contract in any one given situation leaves decisions that are critical to all of the landowners solely in the hands of an unaccountable small group of -- of landowners.
 Can't -- can't such a suit be brought in State court? I can't believe that this district can do whatever it wants with the water.
 Oh, absolutely not. Yes, it -- yes, it can.
 Really?
 No. What I meant to say was yes, you are right.
 Okay.
 And absolutely not. It can't do just anything it wants to do. It is subject, as a governmental entity, to all the strict requirements of California water law and governmental law, for that matter. If, for example, these petitioners decide for whatever reason they don't like a decision of the -- of the board -- and in fact, that is an example that exists emanating out of the facts of this case. When the district decided that it was better to settle the litigation, these landowners first petitioned the -- the governing of the -- of the district and sought to -- to have them not proceed in that manner, the way any other group of citizens or constituents with any other governmental entity would have proceeded. The district decided, however, that it was in the best interests of all of the landowners within the district to settle the litigation. Now, at that point in time certainly, these petitioners had the normal and ordinary rights that any -- any constituent within the district has to be able to challenge a decision that has been made by the district. That includes, for example, writ proceedings, to argue that the decision of the board was arbitrary, capricious, otherwise unlawful, and that it should -- should be mandated to -- to proceed in some other fashion. If the issue were damages, this district is subject, like any other governmental entity within the State of California, to the government Tort Claims Act if -- if they're tortious type damages. And if we have arguable impairment of property rights, this district is subject to the California constitution, the United States Constitution, and the government code provisions that provide for litigation with respect to those broader types of -- of damages. And quite frankly, this is a governmental body and it is very susceptible to the political process. It is not an easy thing for -- for the district to be standing up here and telling you that its landowners aren't entitled to receive what they want. That's a very difficult for the district to -- to do. But in dealing with the rights of the entire district, it's an absolute essential thing to do. If these landowners had exercised their prerogatives under California law, they could have, assuming they were the majority, controlled the decisions of the board of directors in the way that any majority constituency controls the director -- the -- the direction and the decisions of a -- of a governing board. You know, this -- this lawsuit is instructive in -- in a number of ways in terms of these practical concerns that we have in terms of how in the world are we going to be able to administer a contract like this one. How are we going to do all of the things that the Water Code has told us that we have to do if, at any given time, a landowner, a small group of landowners is able to go into Federal district court and independently decide that it wants to administer the contract that the district has with the United States or to enforce terms of the contract that it has with the United States in a manner that's inconsistent or different than the way --
 I don't really understand why that's any greater burden than the fact they can sue you in State court anyway. They -- they can always bring litigation.
 Well, it -- it really requires the district to, in a sense, race to the courthouse with the -- with the petitioners in order to be there first in order to have its views of the contract --
 Well, the suit in State court, I assume, would -- would only be -- the claim would be that you were acting arbitrarily, and so long as your interpretation of the contract was a reasonable one, the suit would fail.
 Yes.
 Whereas, this suit here -- it doesn't matter how reasonable it is. If it's wrong, it's wrong. I mean, it's quite a different --
 No. I think it is a different situation, and I agree with what you -- what you have said, Your Honor. I do, however, want to -- to not avoid the concern that may be expressed here, and -- and that is, that -- that what it does is it -- it forces the district into a situation of chasing its landowners, in essence, around from one litigation forum to another in order to ensure that its means of controlling and -- and administering the contract is not jeopardized. The fact that the landowners -- if the landowners can move forward independently with litigation with respect to the contract, what it really does is create in a sense a -- the contract becomes this very interesting moving target where the district has its views about what the contract is and how it should be administered, how it should be enforced, and then it proceeds in one direction as, for example, it did with the settlement in this litigation, deciding that that was the best way to protect the interests of the district. Had these petitioners on the merits in a hypothetical situation prevailed with a totally different result, that would have substantially affected and impacted the district's ability to be able to maintain the obligations and the commitments that it made to the other settling parties. That destabilizes the ability of the district to actually act in other governmental forums, in forums with the United States, with the State of California, with other districts in the context of attempting to say we control the contract, we enforce its terms, and we can make commitments. And when we make those commitments, we can abide by and we can live up to those commitments in a way that -- that governments ought to be able to do when they're -- when they're making those types of commitments. Having the landowners being able to come or -- and here, I want to make certain. When I use the word landowners, I'm not saying that the landowners are not beneficiaries of the contract. They certainly are.
 What about the provision in the judgment at page 110 that was -- that was cited to us, that -- that the parties may obtain other appropriate relief by the filing of a new action?
 Yes. I -- I think that that -- that phrase is actually begun as a proviso, and I view it as not limiting the ability of the area I landowners in the Barcellos & Wolfsen judgment that you're -- that you're quoting from from being able to act in any other way. It was a non-limiting provision. The -- the first part of the -- the part that you read deals with what their rights to enforce were. The second part was a proviso that simply said notwithstanding this, whatever else you're able to do, you may do. Thank you for your time.
 Thank you, Mr. Somach. Mr. Smiland, you have 9 minutes remaining, but you do not have to use it all.
 Thank you, Your Honor. What happened here is that the United States sold half the water it was obligated to sell under the contract. It doubled the price it was permitted to charge on the other half. It was a massive harm to the farmers. I'm sure you understand.
 Well, you say under the contract. I thought there was a provision in the contract that said that the United States will not be responsible for under-deliveries, and I think it listed the drought and the last thing was any other cause.
 Well, that's what we were about to go to trial on, Your Honor. That's a merits issue. The Ninth Circuit has abstained on whether there was a mandatory statutory duty to cut off this water, and I urge the Court not to -- to dive into that pool. We're trying to get in the courthouse doors.
 But you were saying there's -- there's a right under this contract to recover from the United States for an under-delivery.
 We have massive cross summary judgment motions on that issue and we were entitled to go to trial on that -- on our claim of liability.
 What --
 If --
 No, please.
 No. I've asked a lot of questions. Go on.
 What do you make -- excuse me. What do you make of the argument for reasonable construction of the contract that in fact you just simply cannot have a system that would promise the chaos that -- that you are promising?
 I -- I don't make much of it. The parties here and -- and the parties in the West fully understood for 20 years, after Allen Orchards, that the farmers were intended third party beneficiaries. That's -- we settled in 1986 with that understanding, and this parade of horribles just has not come to pass.
 Is -- is it correct, as Justice Scalia suggested earlier, that so far as State litigation is concerned, it would be limited simply to arbitrary, unreasonable behavior?
 That's true. And even more fundamentally, the United States breached the contract. The district didn't do anything wrong. Why would we sue the district when the United States cut off the water and doubled the charge?
 Well, I think it's arbitrary not to -- not to -- for an agency, of which you're -- you're in some sense at least the beneficiary, not to insist upon its contract rights, just as a shareholder can insist that the -- that a corporation enforce its contracts.
 We had a little mini-trial on that in front of the -- in front of the district court, and -- and I made that argument, Your Honor, and the district court rejected it.
 No, he was wrong. That was -- (Laughter.)
 I agree.
 I guess the reason that you would sue the district would be if you didn't have any enforceable promise from the United States that they didn't -- wouldn't do it.
 Well, we -- we --
 Now, you think you do. That's the issue in the case.
 We had a stipulated judgment.
 And so therefore -- therefore, I'm looking for where that promise is. And you started out by citing a page, which wasn't a page of the contract. It was a page of some kind of settlement, and that page said that the district agrees that they entered into the contract with helping the farmers in mind. I'm sure they did. So what. I mean, I might buy a house with the idea of helping of my child. I'm going to give it to him. That doesn't mean he can enforce the contract.
 German Alliance, Your Honor.
 You mean my child can enforce a contract I enter into with another -- I buy a house and I say I intend to give it to my daughter.
 If the contract --
 And then she can enforce the contract?
 If the contract says --
 Yes. If the contract says. Now, that's why I was interested that you didn't cite language in the contract.
 Oh, yes, we did, Your Honor.
 You -- well, I mean, you started out by referring me to page 110 or 111 --
 That's true.
 -- which doesn't. Now, what is the language in the contract --
 Articles --
 -- that helps you the most?
 -- 15 and 29(b) of the '63 contract and also the 1965 contract explicitly refers to benefit, and probably most dramatically, the recordable contracts that were signed actually with my clients and the United States said that they were made in consideration of the direct and indirect benefits that those farmers would gain from the 1963 contract. Now, paragraph 4.2 in the judgment, which came some years later, reconfirmed that. What was new and different about the judgment is that for the first time it made explicit -- we think it was implied earlier, but explicit that there was enforceable rights in the farmers, and we've argued it under your German Alliance test that's not required, but if it was required, we bargained for, we got it. The -- the court approved that and the Congress approved that. And I -- I -- personally I've looked at all of these cases in recent months. It's very rare for an intended beneficiary to have language like that. In any case, as I was saying, my clients have suffered massive losses. They've been litigating these claims for 25 years. Everyone has assumed there was waiver of sovereign landowner. Everyone assumed they're intended beneficiaries. And we think we should have a forum and a remedy and a right to our day in court.
 Thank you, Mr. Smiland. The case is taken under advisement.
 We'll now hear argument in the City of Rancho Palos Verdes against Abrams. Mr. Lamken.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens. May it please the Court: This case concerns whether Congress, in enacting section 332(c)(7) of the Communications Act, intended to expose local governments and State and local officials to expansive section 1983 liability with the tens of thousands of wireless antenna zoning decisions they must make each year. Entitled preservation of local zoning authority, section 332 provides for State and local agencies in the first instance to implement specific Federal substantive and procedural requirements, together with preserved State zoning laws, in passing on applications to build or modify wireless towers. It then provides a highly distinctive, independent cause of action for accelerated judicial review of the decisions, including a short limitations period and mandatory expedition. That tailored process is sufficiently comprehensive to evidence Congress' intent for enforcement to occur --
 Well, Mr. Lamken, it's not as comprehensive as other schemes where the Court said, on that basis, we would not find a section 1983 cause of action, is it? I mean, it's -- it's more spare.
 It -- it is unusual in its unique focus on private enforcement, but there was a reason for the focus on private enforcement. In other provisions of the Communications Act, the Congress chose -- for example, section 253, Congress chose to eliminate enforcement at -- at the FCC level because it was concerned that State and local governments often wouldn't have enough -- excuse me -- local governments in particular --
 Well, what -- what --
 -- wouldn't be able to -- I'm sorry.
 What would you think of a case where the plaintiff alleges that the antenna zoning was the -- was caused by racial discrimination against the applicant? Would there be a 1983 cause of action, do you suppose?
 Yes. That would still be available because the -- the section 332(c)(7)(B)(v) only provides for a cause of action for violations of the Communications Act. Violations of the Constitution continue to be enforceable directly under section 1983. Section -- section 332(c)(7)(B)(v) is comprehensive in the relevant sense in that for every violation of section 332(c)(7), for every person adversely aggrieved, it provides a mechanism for private judicial enforcement. In addition --
 Well, what about -- it -- it -- section 332 speaks of an award of all appropriate relief. What does that include? Could it include punitive damages? Could it include attorney's fees, do you think?
 In that respect, it is indistinguishable -- for example, the statute that was at issue in Smith v. Robinson, and it doesn't specify the precise forms of relief available. In our view in this case, appropriate relief would mean specific relief, the type of relief that is traditionally given on review of zoning decisions and on review of judicial review of agency action. That's supported by a number of considerations. I should point out, in the first instance, that in this case respondent never did seek damages, or punitive damages for that matter, under section 332(c)(7)(B)(v) itself. But that's supported by a number of considerations. First is the structure of the act, which presents it as a form of judicial review of agency action. The act is structured much as you have -- much as you would when a Federal agency enforces or implements Federal requirements and are subject to judicial review. The only difference is that Congress swapped in, effectively, State and local agencies with the initial implementers in place of the Federal Government. In that respect, it shares some of the characteristics of sections 251 and 252 of the Communications Act which are also implemented by local -- by -- excuse me -- by State governments as opposed to the FCC.
 Mr. -- Mr. Lamken, the argument has been made that 4 years before the telecommunications act we're talking about was adopted, Congress adopted the Cable TV Consumer Protection Act. And in that act, it specifically limited the remedies to declaratory and injunctive relief. Here we face silence. Isn't that an indication that when Congress wants to limit relief to declaratory and injunctive, it will say so in the -- in the measure?
 Justice Ginsburg, that -- that's an example where Congress, for a broad range of statutes that could be potentially used to enforce the Cable Act, chose to restrict the forms of relief available. And it is an example, in the words of Sea Clammers, where Congress has made its intent explicit in the text of the statute. Congress can also by implication limit the forms of -- excuse me -- limit the mechanism for relief that's available, and that's our position here, that Congress by providing --
 What's the -- what's the source of the implication?
 Pardon?
 You say by implication.
 The implication -- Congress has provided a specific mechanism for judicial relief here, section 332(c)(7)(B)(v) itself, and that is a highly adapted mechanism which includes unique characteristics such as a very short limitations period.
 So -- so the -- the implication, I -- I guess, is that unless it specifically provides for damages, it implicitly does not.
 I'm sorry. In terms of Congress making damages available under 332(c)(7)(B)(v), our view of the damage -- mind you damages are only one of the differences we think that exists here, but our view is supported by a number of considerations, in addition to the structure of the statute. For example, appropriate relief is often -- is the traditional form of relief available. In this context traditional relief was always specific relief. Congress also included a specific savings clause that extends not merely to Federal statutes, but prohibits the impairment --
 Excuse me. Where -- where are you getting the term, appropriate relief, from?
 This -- that comes from this Court's decision in Franklin, that where Congress doesn't specifically identify the specific forms of relief available --
 All right. But that's -- that's not in the -- that's not in the text of this statute, is it?
 No, it isn't. It is an inference the Court draws from silence. When the Court -- when Congress provides an express cause of action and does not identify the specific forms of relief available, the Court will infer that Congress intended to provide all appropriate relief. But the term, appropriate relief, is that relief which Congress would have intended, and when the Court is determining that, it takes a look at what the traditional forms of relief are and it will look at things such as the savings clause in 601(c), which expressly says that the statute should not be read, unless it expressly provides, to supersede, impair, or otherwise modify State and local law, as well as Federal law. And in order to put damages into the statute, if it doesn't provide damages expressly, one would have to impair myriad municipal immunity laws that otherwise protect municipalities and State and local officers implementing zoning requirements from liability. Finally, the FCC has --
 And -- and 1983 is not subject to that limitation.
 Well, 1983 is expressly preemptive under this Court's decisions, and it is -- it would preempt the State laws by its own force. But we believe that that also supports Congress' decision not to provide -- or supports the conclusion that Congress did not intend to provide section 1983 relief here because the effect of making the Communications Act enforceable under section 1983 would be to expand the categories of claims for which -- that -- those immunities are unavailable, and it would thereby impair those immunities.
 But are they only immune from damages action or are they immune from suit?
 No. They're generally immunities -- immune from damages actions, not from suits.
 So, I mean, that proves too much because they -- the statute obviously intends to eliminate that immunity. The immunity from suit is -- is clearly --
 Oh, I think -- I think you may have misunderstood. The immunity is not from suit. It's an immunity from damages and the impairment would be the immunity from damages. Section 332 is not designed to impair the municipal immunity statutes, and they are not immunities from suit. They are generally from damage liability. The officers are subject to suit because these are subject --
 Well, it allows suit against either municipalities or States, State or local governments. Right?
 Yes.
 And the States have immunity not just from damages but from suit.
 As a constitutional matter, they have an immunity from suit, but --
 Unless they have chosen to waive it, which --
 Right.
 -- one must assume in this area they haven't.
 Right.
 So you have to regard this provision as intentionally overriding some provisions of State law in -- inasmuch as they apply to -- to immunity.
 Well, first of all, I don't think it would be read to -- to override the State's constitutional immunity to suit.
 No. That's --
 But it would be read to -- it would be read to override immunities to suit that exist under State law because otherwise it couldn't be affected.
 In for a penny, in for a pound.
 Right.
 If they've -- if they've waived --
 But I'm not --
 If -- if you acknowledge that it was intended to affect their immunity from suit, why -- why would we suspect that it was not intended to affect their immunity from damages?
 Well, because it would be -- it would be a provision with no effect whatsoever if it didn't override immunities to suit. But I'm not sure there are provisions that are providing for -- I mean, that there are myriad damages immunity laws that provide municipalities absolute immunity from suit. It's fairly common, at least under California and other State law, for municipalities to be subject to suit for review of their -- of the actions that they make. And that is the typical fashion that this -- this statute simply incorporated that typical fashion of providing judicial review of agency action. Another consideration that supports the view that section 1983 has been displaced is that the act provides an entire process for the implementation of the Federal statutes. It establishes Federal substantive requirements that identifies the agencies to implement them. It provides Federal procedural guarantees, APA-like guarantees, like the requirement of substantial evidence, like the requirement of a written decision, like the requirement of a decision with a reasonable period of time. It then follows up with a mechanism, an adapted mechanism for judicial review. In that sense, it is very much like the statute at issue in Smith v. Robinson. That elaborate process is particularly significant given the pattern of the Communications Act as a whole. The Communications Act repeatedly matches specific regulatory requirements such as, for example, the common carrier requirements in 202 and 203, with corresponding mechanisms for private enforcement, such as an action for suit -- I mean, an action for damages in court or an enforcement action in the commission in sections 206 and 207.
 Does this action have to be brought in Federal court? It says any court of competent jurisdiction. Could --
 Yes. The action can be brought in State court and often is. There are about 50 reported decisions that we have found where the suit has been brought in State court. I haven't seen a particular pattern between the choice, but Congress gave the option.
 Would a State court be free to award damages or would that be preempted under the view you take of the statute?
 The State -- because there's an express preservation of State law in this context, I think that State -- States would be free to award damages under their own laws. They wouldn't -- whatever relief is available under the Federal statute would be available under the available under the Federal statute, and State courts wouldn't be free to second-guess Congress' judgment as to what relief should be provided under Federal statute.
 If the State court allowed damages -- if -- if the State system allowed -- State law allowed damages, would the Federal court, in an action under this section, be allowed to award damages under that -- under the State statute?
 Your Honor, I think since the -- the provision, the savings clause, says that the statute should not be construed to impair State law -- and there are so many municipal immunity statutes and you would only have one construction of the statute -- I believe that the construction would be an across-the-boards construction, that this act does not provide damages and you would not vary from State to State.
 What if the State law authorized the recovery of attorney's fees? Would they be recoverable?
 Pardon?
 What if the State law authorized the recovery of attorney's fees?
 Well --
 What would you do then?
 If the State law provides for recovery of attorney's fees for State violations, then that would control for State violations. For violations of Federal law, the -- the remedies that Congress chose to provide would control and the States would not be permitted to second-guess the -- the remedies --
 I'm not sure why that would be if you, in fact, see the statute as trying to impose an APA-like structure, saying to the States, you decide the substance, we'll give you minimum elements of form, which helps your position. Then if the minimum elements of form are not specifically stated in the statute, there's no reason to interfere with the States. Let them do what they want. Only those minimum elements are what you can't do. That works perfectly for you.
 Justice Breyer --
 It's strongly supported in the history. It may lose your client the money. I don't know.
 Well, in fact, California provides a municipal immunity for permitting decisions, and so my client --
 So then you're only --
 -- would be fine with your position. But that is a potential inference. My -- the normal view would be that where Congress provides a -- a statute, one would normally presume that Congress intended a particular set of remedies to accompany it. You could say that the silence is meant to -- meant to reflect the fact that Congress knew that these would be enforced in State courts, as well as Federal, and it would allow State courts --
 Congress didn't care.
 -- to use whatever --
 Congress wanted to substitute a Federal judgment for the judgment of the States where it said so. And the reason you know that is because that is what is consistent with the purpose of the act and other things are either neutral or negative. Don't interfere with the State unless you have to.
 That is one of our principal contentions, Justice Breyer, which is --
 And what, Mr. Lamken, would be the normal procedure in the State? You make an application for a permit to a zoning board. What is the standard operating procedure under State law? Suppose we don't have any telecommunications act in the picture.
 The normal procedure is either under a uniform State law or California law. If you have a -- an entity which is -- excuse me. If you have either a planning commission or sometimes there's another entity that does the initial review and makes a determination whether to grant the permit. It is then appealable either to a zoning board of adjustment -- that's the -- the model act -- or in California, States -- localities have the option of having the appeal go to the local legislature. That appeal is then reviewed -- is then determined. And finally, once you've gone through that process, under California law it's generally reviewable by a writ of mandate, although other -- other States provide review by writ of certiorari, by mandamus, or by various other procedures, almost always subject to a short limitations period, almost always short -- requiring finality, a final decision, exhaustion through the State process.
 And the remedies being injunctive and declaratory.
 A -- a form of specific relief. Generally they have the authority to effectively go in and revise the decision below, but the remedies ordinarily do not include monetary or compensatory relief I should say.
 Are you saying that it's parallel to what APA review of an agency decision would be?
 It's very much like that. The remand rule that this Court normally requires in the APA context is not so strictly observed in the context of -- of review of -- judicial review of zoning decisions, but it is very much like APA review. That is what prevails.
 It -- it seems to me that the 30-day provision is inconsistent with the award of damages, but after I say that, I can't tell you why. (Laughter.)
 Well, actually this Court's decision in Burnett v. Grattan actually tells you why, and that is that 30-day provisions, which are typical for on-the-record review of decisions below, are often insufficient to allow somebody to develop a whole new record such as their proof of damages, to make important decisions if they're going to have, for example, a jury trial, or to prepare for discovery. And that's why 30-day provisions are not entirely uncommon in the area of judicial review of agency action, but they're wholly unprecedented, for the most part that I know of, in the area of tort-like remedies like section 1983. If I -- if there are no further questions, I would like to reserve the remainder of my time for rebuttal.
 Yes, you may. Mr. Feldman.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Where Congress creates a special cause of action for -- for a violation of a Federal law that necessarily carries with it its own features and incidents, Congress' decisions about the appropriate mechanisms for dealing with that violation of Federal law should not be frustrated or overridden by allowing a 1983 action in addition. In this case, section 332(c)(7)(B)(v), which creates a cause of action for violation of the specific standards in (i) through (iv) is an independent, standalone cause of action. If 1983 didn't exist, 332(c)(7)(B)(v) would, undoubtedly, still provide plaintiffs with a mechanism to get into court and attain redress for the legal wrongs that they claim. Where Congress has taken that step and has thought about what the appropriate remedy should be for a violation of a particular Federal statute and has created a judicial remedy, then it would only frustrate --
 But it -- the statute, though, is silent on the question of damages or attorney's fees, isn't it?
 It is. It doesn't say anything expressly about either of those things, but I think it has long been --
 Can we infer all appropriate relief? Do we?
 As a matter of damages, I think all appropriate relief would be the standard. But as a matter of attorney's fees, I think is a good example of why there shouldn't be a 1983 action here because the law is 100 percent clear, from this Court's decision in Alyeska and other cases, that where Congress hasn't provided for fee-shifting, there simply is no fee-shifting authorized. That's what they intended.
 Attorney's fees are never appropriate, in other words.
 Are never appropriate unless Congress specifically provides for them.
 But it has provided for them for a 1983 action, and if it's a 1983 action, it takes care of it.
 That's right.
 And this is kind of circular.
 I don't think it's circular because I think when Congress created the specific cause of action here in (B)(v), it didn't provide for attorney's fees and therefore intended that attorney's fees not be provided. If respondent's view in this case were accepted, the -- the presumption would be exactly flipped, and Congress would have had --
 Mr. Feldman --
 Suppose Congress said specifically 1983 applies. That's all it says. Would that carry with it attorney's fees in your view?
 Yes, I -- yes, I think it -- I think it would. The question here, though, is where Congress has thought about what kind of remedy it wants for violation of a Federal statute and created a judicial cause of action for every wrong that's -- that -- that can exist under that statute, then the incidents and features of that cause of action should govern, not the incidents and features of 1983 which almost inevitably and in this case are different. And attorney's fees is just the best example of that. If -- under respondent's view -- when Congress was fashioning this statute, it certainly was aware of this Court's decisions that have repeatedly said that attorney's fees are not available unless they're expressly provided for. And indeed, elsewhere in the Communications Act --
 Well, I take -- you -- you take the position that 1983 doesn't apply at all. It's not just attorney's fees. It's damages.
 That's right. But it's just an illustration. There's other differences between the provision here and 1983, but I think the basic point is that where Congress has given thought to the remedy for a particular violation -- type of violation of Federal law and has provided for a judicial cause of action, with whatever features and incidents it -- it wants, 1983 shouldn't be allowed in. It should be assumed that Congress didn't want to have its decisions frustrated by also allowing a 1983 action.
 What about damages?
 Do you -- do you think that any other provisions of the Communications Act are enforceable under 1983? I mean, we're talking about 332, but it's a big, complicated act. Are any of the other provisions enforceable?
 I think -- I think the same rule would apply to any of the provisions where Congress has specifically provided for a cause of action for the same reason, otherwise Congress when -- here, for example, just to return to attorney's fees for a second. When Congress was framing this legislation, they knew that they weren't giving attorney's fees and this 332(c)(7)(B)(v) would be construed not to give attorney's fees, but not --
 Well, this is really a more general proposition you're urging upon us then, that whenever Congress creates a cause of action that is -- what -- in any respect more limited than section 1983, the background action of section 1983 is not available.
 That -- I -- I think that's correct.
 No. How could that be? Wouldn't it depend on whether -- when you look at the particular statute, the particular set of remedies that Congress has included in that statute could be absolutely independent of 1983 or dependent upon 1983 or leaning in favor or leaning against. It would depend on the particular statute. Why in general?
 I think in -- I think the rule would be in general because, first of all, it's not just remedies. There's other incidents of a cause of action such as statute of limitations, the provision here for expedition, and other things. And really when Congress has given thought to what remedy it wants for a violation here of (i) through (iv), for a violation elsewhere in the Communications Act of other Federal standards, it shouldn't be assumed that they all -- that -- to allow a 1983 action would just frustrate Congress' intent in fashioning that particular remedy.
 Then how would you ever have a statute that -- 1983 provides for relief when there's a violation of Federal law, statutory or constitutional. One of the briefs in this very case says that your broad reading means that you were doing away with statute as a basis for 1983.
 I -- I think that that's completely wrong. When Congress has created -- has recognized a right, as this Court has found is essential for a 1983 action, and it hasn't done anything about providing a remedy for that right, hasn't created a cause of action in court in particular, then that's the function of 1983, is to serve -- it provides a cause of action for people who suffer a violation of that wrong, a statutory violation. But where Congress has given thought to what kind of a relief it wanted and it said we want a cause of action with these such-and-such incidents, no attorney's fees, 30-day statute of limitations, expedition, whatever the other ones are here, then it would just frustrate Congress' intent to say, oh, and also you get a 1983 action to undo all of the things that Congress provided for.
 Well, there -- there are two situations. I mean, one can supplement without frustrating. I mean, you -- you could say that in, you know -- in some respects the 1983 will contradict the action that was provided, but one can conceive of a provided action that -- that grants relief which 1983 would not grant.
 That's right. And -- and I -- whatever -- I guess the general point would be whatever remedial decisions Congress made, those should be respected, but I would add in this case it's not just -- it's a question of attorney's fees, which they would have had to -- Congress would have had to do something very unusual here, which is particularly put in this statute no -- there shall be no fee-shifting because otherwise you can always go to 1983 and get it. In fact, even if they had done that in 332(c)(7)(B)(v), respondents would still argue, well, we still have our 1983 action.
 What -- what about damages? Do -- do you take any position on whether the Communications Act provision enables damages to be collected?
 We don't have a position on whether it does. I think there's arguments both ways. I would point out --
 You think it's unnecessary to decide this case.
 I think it is unnecessary, and in fact, I think it shows a problem with -- a reason why our view, which is if Congress creates a cause of action, that should be respected -- why that should be respected. Under other views, you have to look at the 1983 action and figure out all of its incidents. You have to look at the 332 action and figure out all of its incidents in the abstract as here, not where -- in connection with a particular claim for damages, and then see whether they're consistent with each other. I think the much better rule would be to say where Congress has created a specific cause of action, that's what it wanted, and whatever you get under that, you get. Whatever you don't get under that, you don't get. But 1983 shouldn't be used to -- to frustrate Congress' intent and give you things that that cause of action wouldn't to give you a longer statute of limitations, which would be, I think, the case here, to give you -- eliminate the provision for mandatory expedition, to have any differences in damages. Another way to put it would be under the Court's decision in Franklin, this statute gives you any appropriate relief. All that 1983 could do here -- it maybe gives you the same thing in which, as far as that goes, it doesn't matter. But all it could do otherwise would be give you inappropriate relief, i.e., relief that Congress didn't want. And instead of construing the two statutes in that way, they should be construed harmoniously and in accord with this Court's decisions which have set forth the line of cases where you have a right to get into court in Wilder -- I'm sorry -- in -- in Sea Clammers and Smith against Robinson and said there we want to take Congress' remedy, however simple or complex it is. It gives you a complete right to get into court and gives you whatever it gives you. And that should govern. And then the other line of cases, which is Wilder where -- and -- where it says -- and the Wright against Roanoke where Congress didn't give you a right to get to court -- get into court. In those cases, that's the function of 1983. The same thing would be true in -- in a number of other this Court's cases that have recognized you have a 1983 action when Congress gave you a right and didn't think at all about the remedy because that's the function that 1983 was supposed to serve. If there's no further questions.
 Thank you, Mr. Feldman. Mr. Waxman.
 Mr. Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: In -- by its clear text, section 1983 promises redress for the depravation of any Federal right in any, quote, proper proceeding. And that expansive language, this Court has recognized, dictates a heavy presumption that its remedies apply to all violations of Federal rights, a presumption which this Court has said is rebutted only in the, quote, exceptional case in which the statute that creates the right is accompanied by an enforcement scheme that is, quote, incompatible with or inconsistent with 1983's remedies. That's --
 Mr. Waxman.
 -- the background principle.
 Mr. Waxman, it seems to me that the -- the best argument we've heard about incompatibility is the one -- or at least I think the best -- is the one that Mr. Lamken touched on at the tail end of his argument, and that is, he said there's -- there's a 30-day provision in there, which in effect says Congress wants this litigation conducted fast and over with fast. And that is incompatible with a damage action because if you get into a damage action, you are going to get into the panoply of -- of damages litigation, including depositions, and -- and the one thing you can guarantee is that it is not going to be over expeditiously. What is your argument? What is your response to that incompatibility argument?
 Well, I think that the way this Court has interpreted incompatibility before -- in the two instances in 25 years since Maine v. Thiboutot was decided, the only instances in which this Court has found incompatibility has been where use of 1983 would create an end run around limitations in the statute. That is, in the -- in Sea Clammers and in Smith v. Robinson, you had statutes that forestalled an individual's access to court via an administrative regime and then expressly limited the judicial remedies that would be available once they got there by requiring, for example, only injunctive relief.
 Well, the other word is inconsistent, and is it -- sorry. Were you -- is it inconsistent if Congress didn't want it? And if that's insufficient to be inconsistent, then here, as I look at the statute, to get out my thinking, I think that it sounds like an administrative law statute. If I saw the maintenance and cure words, I'd think it was an admiralty statute.
 Okay. I --
 I see an administrative law statute. It sounds like that's the system they're imposing and therefore a system that is not consistent with the administrative law system fails and 1983 seems to fail.
 Okay. Now I have two points. I -- I don't want to forget these. I have to deal with the -- the question of whether a 30-day requirement is inconsistent and whether damages would be inconsistent with what -- with what my colleagues posit as an APA-like administrative review model. A 30-day requirement is simply a reflection of Congress' -- Congress confirming expressly that somebody who -- who is aggrieved under the rights provided to him under 332(c)(7) and wants any judicial remedy, whether it's from 1983 or otherwise, has to go to court promptly. It's precisely what 1983, this Court said in Patsy and Felder, guarantees and requires. It does not require --
 But it also requires expeditiousness on the part of the court.
 It requires that the court proceed expeditiously and courts can proceed expeditiously where damages are sought or are not sought. One of the interesting things about damages --
 But do you -- do you agree with this much, that if -- if damages, in fact, are going to be allowed, what is going to count as expeditious is going to be a lot slower than what is going to count as expeditious if damages are not allowed.
 I don't think that's true. In fact, I think this case is a pretty good example. The court separated it -- I mean, acting under a requirement of expedition at the request of the city. This -- the court didn't even begin to address this case until 18 months after it had been filed. But what it said was --
 Okay. And -- and that --
 -- the first issue --
 -- that was a violation of the statute, wasn't it?
 Well, it first issued an order saying, okay, I've construed the statute and I've determined that the statute is violated. Now we will have a separate proceeding. Then the city will conduct itself accordingly. Now we'll have a separate proceeding in order to determine whether damages or attorney's fees are available. And that is available in any of these cases. What --
 So they turned the damage issue basically just into a separate remedial hearing at the end of the case.
 It could or could not be, and there may -- may be many cases when damages aren't appropriate but --
 I thought that was just to decide in -- in the -- in the court of first instance -- that tail end was not to decide whether in this specific case damages or attorney's fees were due. But the district court was deciding a question of law, that is, whether in this kind of review proceeding anyone could have damages, anyone could have attorney's fees.
 What he said, Justice Ginsburg, was we'll deal with what other remedies, if any, are available and to what extent in a separate proceeding. As it turns out, he concluded in an --
 But was not making a rule for this case only. He was making a ruling of law.
 For sure. He said that I don't think you're entitled to this because I think that the statute doesn't allow it. And therefore, he didn't get to this question. But the point about damages -- I think there are two points that are very important that not be obscured. First of all, the Government -- the fact that the Government and the petitioner can't agree on whether the statute itself provides damages relief under the principle of Bell v. Hood and Franklin v. Gwinnett County certainly shows that Congress did not speak expressly on this subject.
 They -- they don't necessarily disagree. The Government just says the -- the issue doesn't have to be reached in this case.
 Well, I think -- I think that -- what the Government says in its papers is they may well be available and what Mr. Feldman -- I don't want to misquote him, but he said that under Franklin -- he agreed, I think, with what Judge Posner wrote for the Seventh Circuit, which is where no remedies -- where no specific remedies are specified -- and that's the case here -- you apply a rule of judicial implication, announced in Bell v. Hood and applied to an implied right of action in Franklin, to apply that all appropriate relief is available. And damages are the paradigm.
 Mr. Waxman.
 And the irony here --
 Mr. Waxman, how do you -- how do you get a reading of the 30-day limitation, which is applicable to the cause of action under the Communications Act, sucked into the cause of action under section 1983? I mean, if the suit is under 1983, it's under 1983. There's no 30-day limit there.
 I have -- I have two different ways to get to that. First of all, section 1983, by its terms, provides redress in any appropriate cause of action. It also supplies a cause of action where no other cause of action is available, but by its express terms, it doesn't exclusively limit its remedies to causes of action that are brought under 1983.
 No, it doesn't.
 But more broadly --
 It doesn't require you to -- to establish a cause of action under some other statute either.
 That's right. It provides a --
 It does not at all. It's -- it's self-contained. And do you know any case where we have read into, or indeed, it's even been urged upon us to read into, section 1983 limitations that somehow come from the statute that was violated and which forms the basis for the 1983 action?
 Well, I don't, but I do know that this Court -- first of all, Congress has now enacted section 1658 which provides a -- a 4-year Federal default statute of limitations, where -- where a statute like 1983 doesn't provide it, but includes an -- an introduction that says, except where otherwise provided by Federal law. And there's certainly nothing in that language that says when you're looking at whether a statute of limitations is otherwise provided by Federal law, you look to the very statute that creates the substantive right that 1983 is enforcing. And even before that, when your -- your decision in Wilson v. Garcia made the point that when you try to figure out what statute of limitations applies to a freestanding 1983 action, there are -- there is a tripartite rule of construction that section 1988 requires you to engage in. And the first part is to see whether there is any, quote, suitable Federal statute of limitations. Now, in constitutional cases, like the one that was at issue in Wilson v. Garcia or under the Social Security Act, which is what was addressed in Maine v. Thiboutot, there were no express causes of action, much less any express statute of limitations. And so this Court said you then go to the second rule, which is what's the most appropriate State limitations, as 1988 requires. But the anomaly of the argument here is we have a background principle that 1983 is available and there is a heavy presumption that it will be available unless it is explicitly incompatible or inconsistent with --
 Well, that's --
 -- and --
 -- that's why I'm approaching it differently, and I -- I want to get your view on it. I'm taking the word inconsistent and I'm using that as a guide back into the purpose of the statute. And once I do that, I find Congress here anxious, I think, to engage in what I'd call cooperative federalism. They could have run the whole show, but they said we don't want the FCC. We want each city and town to do what they want, subject to a few minimal procedural requirements. If that's right, that means all these damages questions are open. All kinds of things are open, but -- and we'll decide them in a variety of ways, maybe deferring to the State, but one thing is true: 1983 doesn't apply because that is a different set of remedies.
 Justice Breyer, this is not the APA model. This is not a model of administrative review for a number of reasons. Number one, it is a background -- there -- there -- it is established, for purposes of this case, that this statute creates individual Federal rights and those rights were violated. And the background rule is uniformly -- and this Court has -- has -- in Owens v. City of Indianapolis and many other cases has reinforced the principle that damages are available and 1983 is available where Federal rights are violated by municipalities, whether it's under the Takings Clause or the Due Process Clause or the Equal Protection Clause or in statutory cases. What is more --
 Mr. Waxman -- Mr. Waxman, one of these provisions gives you an option to go to the FCC, the one having to do with emissions. Now, if you sought review from the local decision to the FCC, you petition for FCC relief, would the FCC have authority to give you attorney's fees?
 The FCC has said that it does not if you do that. In -- in 2000, when the FCC last reported, one person had chosen to go that route rather than go to Federal court. It --
 Well, isn't that an incongruity that Congress would say you have your choice? Complainant, you can go to the Federal agency, the FCC, or you can go to court.
 You can't go to the -- excuse me. I didn't --
 So if -- if you have that choice, when you're dealing with the radio emissions, to go the -- why would any litigant ever do that? Why would any attorney ever do that if you don't get fees at the FCC and you do get fees in court? Wouldn't the presumption be that it would work the same way whether you go to the agency, Federal agency, or Federal or State court, that you're in the same situation as respect to fees?
 The -- the FCC alternative for a declaration by the FCC applies to only one of the five rights that are provided here, and even if it applied to all of them, I don't think you could possibly infer that --
 Well, let's take the one, that -- that one. Are you saying no attorney's fees there because you couldn't get them at the FCC, therefore you shouldn't get them in court?
 Absolutely not. If -- if there were an instance in which a local zoning official said, you know, I know I'm not supposed to take radio frequencies emissions into account, but I'm going to, it's denied, I would have the right either to go to the FCC and say, tell them no, or to file an action under 332 and/or 1983 and say that violates my rights. And actually your example --
 But isn't --
 If I just may finish. Your example, I think -- the example of this particular provision points out that what -- the balance of what I was going to explain to Justice Breyer, which is that another reason why this isn't the APA model is that this statute includes in little (i) and little (ii) substantive provisions, not just procedural provisions. You can't discriminate, to give Justice O'Connor's first example, among providers. The -- that was a complaint in this case. There is de novo review, it is clear, on those claims. It's not administrative APA review in any respect. And in fact, the district judge in this very case, Judge Wilson, says it looks like, in fact, you were discriminated against, but I don't need to reach that because it's clear that there was no substantial evidence.
 They -- they didn't provide for the normal administrative review because they were quite aware that under the State zoning systems, there would always be State administrative review before the issue even comes up.
 And this --
 And so what this provides is what kind of judicial review there will be after the anticipated administrative review before the zoning board and whatever appeal from the zoning board exists.
 I -- I have to respectfully disagree. This Court, in -- in Williamson County and Darby and many other cases, has distinguished carefully between final -- final action and exhaustion of administrative review or judicial review. And all this statute requires is that if you are aggrieved by an action or inaction of a State or local government or an instrumentality thereof --
 Final. Final action or failure to act is what --
 That's correct.
 Final action or failure to.
 And final action, this Court has explained, does not import into it exhaustion of either a State administrative or judicial remedies. What it means is that once you have been injured, it's a -- it's a ripeness requirement that's familiar under --
 You haven't been injured until you've exhausted your --
 That is --
 You -- you really think that when there is a State provision available for review of the zoning board, you can commence an action under 1983 without even going through the administrative appeals?
 I am entirely certain of that, and in fact, the -- the local ordinance -- I mean, the question of what is final agency action is surely a Federal question, but --
 This is really respecting the States, which is what the -- the purpose of this -- of this whole provision was.
 Justice Scalia, when Congress addressed this problem in 1996, as the Government points out in the very first page of its brief and as the legislative history reflects, it was confronting a situation in which intransigent, entrenched zoning authorities were acting arbitrarily to frustrate the creation of a national wireless network. And it was so concerned about this that the House actually passed a provision that removed this paradigmatic local authority to the FCC. The FCC was --
 Which would be more burdensome? That enactment or subjecting municipalities nationwide to damages? Which would be more intrusive and burdensome on federalism --
 I think --
 -- and the abilities of local governments to function?
 Oh, I think the former, for sure. I mean, the notion that zoning decisions, siting decisions would be removed entirely from localities is unbelievably intrusive. And what happened in the conference committee was a compromise was reached whereby Congress' objective was going to be achieved by creating -- by leaving it, in the first instance, Justice Kennedy, to local --
 Well, I'm -- I'm not so sure because you're arguing that even the smallest municipality can be liable for hundreds of thousands of dollars of attorney's fees.
 Well --
 And I --
 -- let me just say this, with respect to the --
 Plus other -- plus other damages.
 I think this case, Justice Kennedy -- I have three things to say about this. Just this case is every bit as -- as paradigmatic as the parade of horribles that they suggest. And here's my proof. It has been since 1997 that courts have been ruling that 1983 and damages are available under this statute. There is no evidence in any of the briefs on the other side or any of their amici that there has either been a flood of litigation or inappropriately large awards. And if that happened, Congress would do -- would be attentive to it in the way that Justice Ginsburg pointed out when the local cable authorities came to -- came to the very same committees 4 years before and said, we're being hit -- there's an express right of action in 555 of the -- the Communications Act. We're being hit with very large 1983 awards. Please do something about it. And the very same committees 4 years before enacted a provision that said you may get only injunctive and declaratory relief, thereby creating an incompatibility with 1983, as the legislative history expressly provides.
 Well, cable -- cable media companies may -- may have Congress' ear more readily than -- than -- you know, than the municipality of whatever this is or any --
 State and -- than State and local governments? I hope not. But here's -- here's the additional --
 But I -- I wouldn't put a lot of money on it. (Laughter.)
 The point is that Congress -- Justice Kennedy, the point is not that Congress was being inattentive to State and local budgets. What it wanted to do what was this -- the point this Court the addressed in -- in Stakura and -- and Owens v. City of Indianapolis, which is to enforce a Federal statute through privately enforceable Federal rights, which would include a damages remedy that both provides a deterrent against conduct that had provided entrenched resistance to a Federal program and provide compensation where reasonable and appropriate. Now, this Court has made clear, with respect to damages, in -- in Carey v. Piphus and other cases, that there may be very many cases in which there's a violation of a procedural right but only nominal damages are available. And in Buckhannon --
 But with respect to --
 If I may just finish this sentence. And in Buckhannon and Farrar v. Hobby, this Court has -- has recognized that in order to get attorney's fees, you have to have substantially prevailed and a court, under 1988(b), may award attorney's fees in its -- may award -- in its discretion insofar as they are reasonable. And --
 Mr. -- Mr. Waxman.
 Yes, Justice Ginsburg.
 There is in this legislative record a concern expressed by a Senator from California when there was a proposal on the table to make the FCC the Federal review forum. And that was rejected, if I understand correctly, because there was a concern that municipalities would have to travel all the way to Washington, D.C. to defend in the FCC's forum. And Congress did not want to saddle municipalities with the cost of transporting their representative to D.C. Well, that cost would pale compared to attorney's fees that would be awarded.
 First of all, Justice Ginsburg, I -- the reference to those two Senators -- what those two Senators were talking about is not, as my colleague's brief suggests, this provision. They were talking about another provision of the Telecom Act. I think it was section 253, but I may be wrong. But even if that's the case, the fact of the matter is that whether it was going to cost them -- I agree. It would cost -- look, a regime in -- which left all of these siting decisions to the FCC is breathtaking, and it certainly would impose lots of costs not only on local municipalities to have to come to Washington to justify these decisions, but certainly on the FCC, which would have to send an army out to example -- I mean, it would sort of like be the -- the television commercial, you know, where the guy is walking around saying, you know, can you hear me now, can you hear me now? The fact is it made great sense to continue to leave the initial decisions with local authorities. But Congress had -- was frustrated, expressly frustrated with the fact that the prior regime, in which they had let local authorities do it under their normal routines and applying the normal remedies, was not getting the job done. That was the imperative of this statute. And in the -- in the absence of any evidence, even now 11 years later -- or I guess it's 10 years -- 9 years later. In the absence of any evidence of a flood of litigation or inappropriate awards, I think given the very heavy presumption that this Court has recognized over and over and over again, that 1983 is there.
 That isn't the only --
 1983 is the background principle against which Congress legislates. And this statute either -- neither provides nor excludes any remedies, and all it does is confirm that when you go -- when you are injured, you can go to court. And --
 The other -- the other harm is there any evidence of because it's -- it would also be harmful if local zoning boards, when faced with quite difficult decisions, because the -- the antenna -- they bristle up and you put them in the wrong place. They're environmentally harmful. They -- there are a lot of bad things, as well as good things about them. And of course, it would be a bad impact if we discovered that the zoning boards were erring too much on the side of granting everybody's application, as well as too much on the side of not granting them.
 To be sure.
 And so I -- I don't know how -- what the -- there won't be evidence. How can we get evidence on such a thing?
 The -- the -- you -- the evidence will be either in the decided cases or by local municipal governments coming to Congress and saying, this is too heavy a thumb on the scale. But what we know is that if you afford only prospective relief, which is the -- the ancien regime that Congress was -- that Congress felt wasn't doing the job, it provides no deterrent, no incentive to accomplish what Congress said was --
 But I -- I don't think we --
 -- a compelling national objective.
 I don't think we usually think of -- of judicial review of agency decisions in the ordinary course as being a deterrent.
 We --
 It's an opportunity to elaborate reasons. It's a safeguard. It's not a deterrent. And you're saying it has to be a deterrent. And as Justice Breyer indicates, it -- it means that there's -- there's another voice in that -- in that administrative hearing room. They're terrified of damages.
 Justice Kennedy --
 And it's going to skew the decisions.
 Justice Kennedy, it -- under their -- under the regulations of this municipality, which is -- is perfectly representative, it is final agency action when the city planning commissioner says no, unless you choose to appeal it to the city council. And there is -- not only is there nothing peculiar about applying 1983 damages awards to the violation by a State and local government of an express Federal right, assuming you can prove not only that the right was violated but also that you were really damaged. It's -- I'm not suggesting that -- that Congress had damages in mind specifically and only to deter conduct. You have said in a variety of instances -- I mentioned Stacura in particular -- that 1983 damages do serve as a deterrent to violation of Federal rights by municipal local officials. But what Congress had -- Congress had to come up with some way to confront this problem in which there were sort of local parochial --
 May I ask this question, Mr. Waxman? I don't know if it's really a legal question exactly, but I have the impression that most of the plaintiffs in this type of litigation are well-financed, large companies rather than the typical 1983 plaintiff. And therefore, you don't need the attorney's fee incentive to be sure these rights are protected. Is that a correct impression or is it incorrect?
 I -- I don't know whether it's a correct impression or not. Our brief points the Court to an authority that at least 9,500 of the entities that have -- have created antennas or tower facilities have 10 or fewer facilities. And one thing we know for sure is that when Congress enacted the Telecom Act of 1996, it specifically wanted to encourage small operations, start-up companies. It had specific provisions in the law to give special treatment to small entrepreneurs in order to foster diversity and competition. But in the event that you --
 I can't imagine -- I can't imagine, Mr. Waxman, that Congress wanted to impose damages plus attorney's fees upon municipalities without even giving the municipalities the chance to correct their mistakes, which is what you're saying.
 Well --
 You're saying the municipalities' appeal system, which is there for people to take advantage of, is just washed out. One mistake at the lowest level and you get damages and you get attorney's fees. That -- that is extraordinary.
 Justice Scalia, the -- the -- 1983 -- and your jurisprudence shouts this as clearly as it does any other principle -- stands for the proposition that it's there unless, in the explicit language of the statute that creates the right, there is a demonstrated incompatibility. And that's the background rule. There are many instances in the Telecom Act and elsewhere in which Congress has said you can only get injunctive relief. You may not get 1983 damages. I mean, go back to Adickes v. Kress where this Court said in title II of the Public Accommodations Act, Congress expressly -- expressly precluded damages in order to avoid invocation of 1983. And I'm not saying that Congress had in mind my client, who is an individual, a sole entrepreneur, who was subject to, I think what the record shows is, prolonged and entrenched intransigence by this particular municipality, any more than it had Judge Posner's example in the Seventh Circuit where it was, you know, Verizon v. the Village of Mequon. But this Court has recognized, as have the lower courts, that you only get damages if you prove that you really have been damaged. And in an instance where there's some procedural violation and a remand to correct it, this may very well be the instance of Carey v. Piphus, where the damages are purely nominal. The agency is given the opportunity. In this case, the city never said, give us the opportunity to go back and correct it. And Judge Wilson, a very level-headed district judge, said there's nothing to go back and correct because the only thing -- the only reason that the city gave was it didn't like this antenna and tower in the first place. It -- we concede that it makes no difference to anybody which frequencies are being broadcast from this tower that we approved 10 years ago and have no right to modify. And therefore, there was a substantive violation, not just, you know, you -- you may have had substantial evidence but you didn't lay it all out or you gave your reasons at length and orally but not in writing, I'll give you the opportunity to go back. There's a line of cases this Court has decided under the Social Security Act where there have been remands to correct procedural errors or small errors, and in those instances, Carey v. Piphus says you don't get damages. And under Buckhannon and Farrar v. Hobby, you probably don't get attorney's fees either. If there ever is the sort of parade of horribles that they protest about, even a small parade of horribles, Congress will be as attentive as it was in 1992 when the cable --
 Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Lamken, you have about 4 minutes left.
 I'd like to make only two brief points. First, that the imposition of the -- of damages and fees under section 1983 from a decision in this Court for even good faith mistakes in the implementation of the antenna siting rules, which are often complex and uncertain, would be a welcome mat for extensive and aggressive litigation and the imposition of extensive fees on municipalities which simply cannot afford to enforce their zoning rules, the rules that Congress expressly attempted to preserve in the statute itself. It is -- in this case alone, for example, respondent's most recent estimate of his damages and fees -- and this was before he retained Mr. Waxman, I might add -- is -- is $15 million, essentially the city's entire budget for a year. And respondent claims to be a relatively small operator. That sort of -- with that sort of liability in an uncertain area of law, very few municipalities could ever afford to stand on their rights to enforce local zoning even when they're relatively certain that they are right. Section 332(c)(7) is entitled and has one of its purposes as the preservation of local authority. It should not be construed to provide for that authority's evisceration. The second point I wanted to hit is that when Congress established the mechanism for review in 332, it provided a very adapted mechanism with an unusual pair of characteristics: a very short limitations period and mandatory expedition. This Court's decisions in Novotny makes it clear that neither of those requirements can be simply transferred over to section 1983. Novotny had very similar language, a 90-day limitations period. The Court did not transfer that over to section 1983. Instead it understood that the general rule, the general Federal principle of law, that in the absence of an express limitations period, that State law would control. Wilson then confirms that rule, as an interpretation of section 1988, that the governing Federal principle is that State law controls unless there's an express Federal cause of -- statute that addresses that particular cause of action. If there are no further questions, we ask only that the judgment of the Ninth Circuit be reversed. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Lamken. The case is submitted.
 And we will now hear argument in McCreary County against the ACLU. Mr. Staver?
 Justice Stevens and may it please the Court. Before this Court is a setting of law in a courthouse and a display on law that contains the universally recognized symbol of law. Despite the fact that the deck law occupies only one tenth of this otherwise secular display, the Sixth Circuit struck it down. The Court focused solely on the religious aspect of the Ten Commandments and that's aired by ignoring the overall context. The Ten Commandments is unlike most any other acknowledgment. It is in a category essentially all by itself. It is thematic in common places in courthouses while Nativity scenes and menorahs occur occasionally and often gratuitously on public property. The Ten Commandments occurs quite frequently and has for more than a century in courthouses all over this nation. It is associated with courthouses for a clear historic reason, because the Ten Commandments has played an influential role in American law and government and our system of law in this country. The context in this case is clearly important. Yet the Sixth Circuit --
 May I ask you there basically to comment on the point that Justice Scalia made in the course of the last argument? The context, as we know, has changed pretty radically in the course of litigation over this and it started out with just the Ten Commandments alone and then version 2, the Ten Commandments had certain -- were surrounded by certain quotations of religious content from other texts. And finally, as I guess literally is true with a new lawyer and more litigation, we've gotten to the present context. Isn't the problem that you have to face, as I've said before, what Justice Scalia raised before, everybody knows what's going on. Everybody knows that the present context is simply litigation dressing and that the object for what is going on is the object that was revealed in the first place. What is your response to that?
 Several. The display in this case has three different phases. First it was the stand-alone Ten Commandments. They were sued. They could have defended that but they chose instead to switch rather than fight because they wanted to try to comply with this Court's establishment clause jurisprudence, to try to figure out how to be able to display this particular document. They stepped, however, on a land mine admittedly with this second display.
 Well, they created the land mine basically. I mean --
 They were trying to do the best that they could, trying to follow this ever bending establishment clause jurisprudence especially in the area of displays. Remember this was back in 1999. At that time, there were less than a handful of reported decisions ever in this country on the Ten Commandments. The first was in 1973, Stone was in 1980 and there were a couple of others. There are only 30 reported cases in the country or so and 23 of those happened from 1999 to the present so they didn't have really any guidance. They were trying to follow Lynch and Allegheny as best as they could but these are governmental officials. They're not jurists schooled in the law. And admittedly they made a mistake. But what they have now is the foundation is display and as the District Court recognized, it is fundamentally different than any previous display. Like this Court's decision in the Sunday law cases, even though it may have started off for a religious purpose, the Sunday laws were continued to be retained for secular reasons. In this case --
 Are you saying that the purpose is neutral or that the purpose doesn't matter?
 We're saying that in this case, the purpose is about the display of law. We also have an argument later on that this Court should reconsider the purpose in generally as it relates to the Lemon test.
 Okay, but if we still have a purpose inquiry, what you say of course is true. The current display includes the display of a lot of legal documents. But is there any reason for anyone to believe that that display of legal documents or anything else would be there for any other purpose than the display of the Ten Commandments, including the religious, the overtly theistic part of the text?
 Yes, Your Honor. The District Court actually recognized that one of the omni intended effects of the history is to educate everyone of the difference between an acknowledgment and an establishment. And even if they had a religious purpose under the second display, that religious purpose has been buried and has been abandoned. They voluntarily accepted the --
 You're not abandoning the position that you have a right to make this kind of religious display, are you?
 No, we're not.
 Okay.
 And that's why we said that they could have defended the individual first display which was the Ten Commandments alone, in part because it is the uniquely recognized historic symbol of law and is commonplace and thematic in the courthouse. They could have defended when they were originally sued on that basis alone but instead they chose to modify the display. And when they modified the display, it had excerpted sections around it.
 But is there -- I guess -- I don't want to tie you up too long but I mean given the history, isn't it still the case that there is no serious reason to believe that there is any object here other than the display of the Ten Commandments including the overtly theistic text and the rest of this is basically enabling context which does not affect the objective, the objective being the Ten Commandments and the religious text?
 Your Honor, they must be able to change their misstep, if it was a misstep, that they had. Otherwise, that past case would be superimposed on the foundation's display forever and the question would be --
 Well, not forever but for now. This isn't a case in which they came up with the Ten Commandments display, it got enjoined and 10 years later somebody comes along and says, let's have a display of important documents in the history of law. This in fact is a continuous process and it is a continuous process within the context of litigation about the constitutionality of the display. It's not a -- the implication is not that you can never have a different display but that there is no reason to believe that the intent of this display has changed as the context has changed. What is your response to that?
 The intent has certainly broadened in this case and there is clearly no evidence in this record that this foundations display is solely purposed or intended to be a religious display. In fact, even the respondents of amici that wrote against us said that on the face of this display, it appears secular in nature. It does. In fact, the foundations display not only has numerous other documents of which the Ten Commandments is only one tenth of these many other document but it also has a foundations document that says what the purpose is about. There is only two places that talk about the purpose on the foundations display. On the document itself, which says it's a display about some documents that influenced American law and government, and the undisputed testimony that these are documents that reflect documents that have influenced American law and government. That's the record before this Court on the foundations display and that is fundamentally different --
 Suppose we go back to the first display. If all that was there was the Ten Commandments, now, in your opinion, was that constitutional?
 That is arguably constitutional --
 Do we take it along with the resolution of the counties? Do we look at everything?
 Your Honor, there was no resolution, Justice O'Connor, for the first display. It just went up.
 So just that first display, what was the purpose of that first one?
 The purpose of that first one is like it is in many courthouses around the country. Both courthouses have numerous documents of his historical nature along the walls,284 just in the curia alone. And in Pulaski, many, many documents, when they celebrated their 200th anniversary in 1999. So that was one of many documents that's there and that was a document of the Ten Commandments that was meant to show the historic nature of the Ten Commandments, how it has in fact influenced American law and government in the appropriate setting of a courthouse.
 The original one?
 The original one.
 Was there anything there that said we're interested in history and what we're not interested in is having this on the wall as -- to encourage people to study the Bible and to encourage them to study religion and to understand that in their lives, religion should be important and this very solemn secular setting. Nonetheless, religion is important. Is there anything like that on the document itself?
 No, it was just the document itself in a frame on a wall amongst almost 300 other documents.
 What if its purpose were to demonstrate -- and I quote from one of our earlier opinions -- that we are a religious people whose institutions presuppose a Supreme Being. What if that were its purpose? Would that have made it bad?
 I don't believe so, Justice Scalia, because that in fact is an acknowledgement that is part of our history; like in Marsh versus Chambers. That's why this Court has authorized prayers before legislative sessions or suggested that the national motto is constitutional because indeed we are a religious people as this Court has said more than five times. We are a religious people. Our institutions do presuppose the existence of a Supreme Being.
 And is it your position that no real harm is inflicted on people who do not agree with that message?
 That's correct, Your Honor. Justice Kennedy, it would not inflict any harm because in this case, it's a passive display in a courthouse in a hallway and you could simply walk past that and avert your eyes once you see this. It inflicts no harm, it does not --
 Mr. Staver, what about all the distinctions that have been made between messages that are brief or I think the expression has been minimal or minimum in some of our cases, like in God we Trust, like God save the United States and this Honorable Court, like under God, and a document that is about worshipping the Lord, at least as many words devoted to that topic. So it's not a brief reference. It's a powerful statement of the covenants that the Lord is making with his people.
 Justice Ginsburg, the Ten Commandments is a unique symbol in the area of acknowledgment because of its historic role in influencing our law and government. It is displayed in this context for that unique role. It does have some statements in there about God but, frankly, very few when you look at the overall context.
 Have you read the first four commandments and could you say that?
 Sure. And those are definitely and decidedly religious. There is no question that the Ten Commandments is a religious document. There is also no question that it has influenced our American law.
 Do you think the Ten Commandments are longer than the legislative prayers you've heard at the beginning of congressional sessions?
 No, Justice Scalia. I think they're quite shorter.
 I don't know how much help I can get or not but I was thinking in terms of the involvement of the government, is the government involved in religion when it posts the Ten Commandments alone? Yes, of course it is. Now, there could be a purpose to it, that they want to just show the history of law but it's all by itself and there is a lot more history than that and context may matter a lot. Not everybody will go with the Ten Commandments just by itself there and say, well, gee, this seems to go too far. This is going too far. Why? Because it isn't really related to history, it's the only thing up there, it's involvement in religion, so forth. Now, suppose I go down that track because what I'm really looking for is a key as to what's too far and what's not. But for present purposes, let's assume it's too far. Now, once they've gone too far there, the next thing that happens is they keep changing it but they change it pursuant to the resolution and it seems as if in context, all they've tried to do is to surround what went too far with a number of other things that would somehow make it legal. Now, if it was wrong to begin with, is it wrong to end with?
 No, Justice Breyer, it is not wrong to end with any more than it would be wrong to begin with the Sunday laws based upon the Sabbath commandment which was a commandment about worship and the end with the secular reason for keeping those particular laws as this Court has recognized in McGowan. And in this case, even if they started off with a decidedly and only religious purpose, which we contend they did not, they did not end with one and they've got to, as governmental officials, be able to adjust their missteps whenever they step on a constitutional land mine that is sometimes blurry and confusing to them. That's what they tried to do in this case, the best efforts to try to follow this Court's decision when there was really no specific guidelines for them to be guiding their direction. The Ten Commandments that Justice Stevens, you had mentioned about the versions, the versions I don't believe, with all due respect, are relevant in this case or any other case regarding the Ten Commandments because if that were the case, you wouldn't be able to teach the Bible in an appropriate context because there are so many different versions and yet Stone and Schempp has indicated that you indeed can teach even the Biblical text with all of its multiple versions.
 But I assume if you were running a course in a school about the biblical text, you would explain the differences. You would indicate the difference between the Jewish, the Roman, the Protestant, the Lutheran and so on and you're not doing that here. I would have thought your answer might be, well, if that really made a difference, we could have separate versions. But it's not comparable to school teaching.
 Justice Souter, it would in fact be somewhat comparable because if you're teaching general biblical text, you wouldn't have all the versions lined out.
 Would you think it was appropriate in a public school course that was otherwise a bona fide course to teach the day on exodus, to teach about simply the Protestant version of the Ten Commandments?
 We would believe that, in fact, in this case, I don't even think they thought about whether there were different versions but we certainly believe that they could have the text there and talk about the Ten Commandments.
 In a public school, wouldn't it be required, at least for intellectual reasons if not the reasons of the establishment clause to say, well, graven images are dealt with differently in the standard Roman translation and the preamble sections of what may and may not be regarded as commandment number 1 are different in the Christian versus Jewish and so on. Wouldn't that be an intellectually responsible requirement?
 That's in a school context which this is a courthouse context.
 Exactly. I thought you were equating the two together.
 Not one to one but I think the version issue, if there is a version that flunks the test, it would be this Court's south frieze. It's actually in Hebrew and it speaks only to Jewish people. But yet that's not sectarian such that it violates the establishment clause. That's the acknowledgment as opposed to an establishment. Justice Stevens, if you would like, I would like to reserve the remaining of my time.
 Yes, you may do so. Mr. Clement, you're welcome to stand up for a second time.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court. The display of historical documents here, like the display in the Lynch against Donnelly case of the creche, may include a religious item without running afoul of the establishment clause. As in the --
 Do we have to consider the history of the display at all?
 Justice O'Connor, we would urge you not to consider the history of the display. You in your concurring opinion in the Pinette case made the point that in the context of accommodations, the inquiry into religious purpose doesn't make a lot of sense and you urged the Court to drop it in that context. I think so too in the acknowledgment context. Certainly if you have a situation where you don't have -- I think in the acknowledgment context as well, a focus on purpose may not be that productive. But I would like to talk about the purpose --
 I don't know what you mean by the acknowledgment context.
 I think this Court has said that you can accommodate religions. They've also said that you can acknowledge the role that religion has played in our society and I think in both contexts, a focus on purpose is probably not a prudent exercise of judicial resources. But I would like to talk about the purpose here because I think what you have here is a display of a document alone in the first instance that certainly was at least defensible and probably constitutional, yet the courts below got off on the wrong foot by saying that the first display was open defiance of this Court's decision in Stone against Graham and I think this Court's cases themselves suggest that the contextual differences between the school and the courtroom are enough to at least make the display not in open defiance. Now there was the second display and we are not here to defend the second display but that was the display that was in reaction to the lawsuit filed against the first display. Now, I don't know if that second display was the product of bad legal advice or simply frustration at the first lawsuit being filed but I don't think it should make a constitutional difference. In the Lynch against Donnelly case, Mayor Lynch, after the ACLU filed a lawsuit against him, had a rally at the site of the creche, a press conference, where he publicly vowed to fight to keep Christ in Christmas and then he led city workers in carols and said they should sing another one that apparently bothers people. Yet despite that adverse reaction to the litigation being filed against the city of Pawtucket, this Court upheld the display and although the dissent did focus on the mayor's crusade to keep Christ in Christmas, the majority and the concurring opinions did not. And I think that is the proper mode of analysis. Now, the second point I think is should these counties be faulted for trying to bring their practices in compliance with the Constitution? And I think the answer there is clearly not. And I was going to point this Court to the Marsh case that's been talked about quite a bit. One of the things that as Professor Chemerinsky said about the Marsh case that this Court emphasized in that case itself and in subsequent cases is the fact that the prayers there were non-sectarian in the sense that they did not directly invoke, say, Christ. But that actually is something of a change that took place after the litigation began. Prior to the litigation, there were explicit references to Christ as Justice Stevens pointed out in footnote 2 of his dissent in that case. But the state of Nebraska, after they had a lawsuit, decided let's make this an easier case for the Court, not a harder case, and they modified their conduct.
 Okay, but at the end of the day in Marsh, there wasn't any question that what they were doing was praying. And here it seems to me that the change that you're arguing for as significant is only significant unless it is a change in the essential activity because there is no law and it would be crazy law from this Court that said you can engage in religious endorsement, promotions, et cetera, so long as you hide the ball well enough. What this Court basically has said is you can engage in secular objectives that incidentally involve religious figures or references, e.g., Moses up there. What you started with in this case or what the county started with was a pretty religious-looking exercise and the question is, did they go from a totally religious exercise to a secular exercise or did they go from an obviously religious exercise to an obscured religious exercise? And therefore, you can't make context a mere change in physical context dispositive because it ignores that distinction. And that distinction I think is what is driving or what is going to drive possibly in my mind the resolution of this case. What do you say to that?
 Justice Souter, I have two points in response. First of all, what I think would be a crazy way of having a jurisprudence is for the Court to say that this display is a foundation to the law document, it's perfectly constitutional in every other county courthouse in Kentucky except for McCreary County and Pulaski County because of their prior conduct. The second point that I think is important in this context is that I think this Court's establishment clause jurisprudence is already difficult enough to apply without creating the First Amendment equivalent of covered jurisdictions under section 5 of the Voting Rights Act.
 Basically, and I think I understand you, you're saying, and I think you said it earlier, drop the intent clause and basically have a -- try to move toward an objective criterion saying there are some ways you can display religious things and some ways perhaps that you can't and try to develop that kind of objective jurisprudence as distinct from an intent jurisprudence. That's your point, isn't it?
 That would be my point, Justice Souter, but I also think independent of that point, it is also not a particular productive jurisprudence to really treat different municipalities differently because the mayor in one case may have started with the creche and decided to add the wishing well or in the other case started the wishing well and added the creche. I don't think it makes any sense that if they end up in the same place, the constitutional rules could be the same.
 Mr. Clement, you placed heavy reliance on Marsh, which was prayer and it was undisguised and it was permitted to have since the beginning of our nation. Would it be equally compatible with the establishment clause if this Court opened its daily sessions with prayer?
 Justice Ginsburg, I'm not sure that I could the jurisprudence that said this Court could not open its sessions with a prayer but the Capitol can. Now, if there was any difference drawn at all, I would assume it would be a difference based on history.
 I'm not sure we don't deal with it. I don't know who we're addressing when we say God save the United States and this Honorable Court.
 The kind of prayer that is used to open the legislative sessions which this Court has distinguished from in God we trust, God save the United States and this Honorable Court.
 And as I said, Justice Ginsburg, I think if there were a difference in principle, it would have to be a difference based on history. But I don't think there is -- in this context, I think it is fair to say --
 I'm asking you what your view is of the compatibility of every federal Court in the country having over the bench a replica of the Ten Commandments and opening each session with prayer.
 Justice Ginsburg, I suppose if the federal courts decided to do that, we would probably try to defend them on establishment clause grounds. I don't think, though, that -- I think that would obviously be a much tougher case than the posting of the Ten Commandments in the outer hallway along with a variety of other documents which I take it to be the first case here. And then the final display that the Court has before it is actually the Ten Commandments in the context of the other secular historical documents. And I think that kind of display clearly is constitutional for the reasons that the display was constitutional in the Lynch case.
 Do you think we have to amend the Lemon test to reach your approach?
 Well, Justice O'Connor, this Court on a variety of occasions has chosen to simply put Lemon to one side as opposed to overtly amending it.
 Do you think, then, we have to either put it aside or amend it?
 No, I don't, Justice O'Connor.
 To decide this case?
 No, I don't. I think it would be prudent, as I suggested at the outset, to make not necessarily a full amendment and eliminate the first purpose prong of Lemon but at least in the acknowledgment context as in the accommodation context we're not going to focus on that. But independent of that, I think many of these Court's cases that were decided even under Lemon acknowledge the principles that municipalities should be rewarded, not punished, nor trying to change their conduct to try to get things right. In Abbington against Schempp, which I think in many respects is a precursor to Lemon because it talked at least about the purpose and effects test and I gather that's about all that's left of Lemon. In that case, this Court held out the promise that it might be permissible for the government to have some use of the Bible in school. Now, when it did that, it didn't except out Abbington township and said, but not for you, Abbington township, because you violated the purpose prong. The Sixth Circuit here has adopted a rule that once mistaken, always condemned and we don't think that has any proper place in this Court's establishment of jurisprudence.
 Thank you, Mr. Clement. Mr. Friedman?
 Justice Stevens and may it please the Court, three times in the course of a year, McCreary and Pulaski county posted Ten Commandments displays. They variously describe the Ten Commandments as the precedent legal code of Kentucky, the central historic legal document of the State and, finally, as the moral background of the Declaration of Independence and the foundation of our legal system. In the course of the litigation, they announced that under current law, they announced to the curt that uncurrent law, America is a Christian nation and they acknowledge that the purpose of their second display was to demonstrate America's Christian heritage. In this context, it is our position that the current courthouse display reveals both a purpose and an effect to endorse religion. This Court has repeatedly and most recently in the Santa Fe case made clear that it is necessary to look at the content, the context and the history of a display in order to gauge whether or not there is a true secular purpose or whether or not an asserted secular purpose is a sham. We submit here that on this record, the District Court and particularly in the context of an appeal from a preliminary injunction, which we have here, that the District Court had ample evidence from which it could conclude that the asserted secular purpose of McCreary and Pulaski counties was indeed a sham. The counties announced their purpose not only in the content of the display itself but in the resolution that the counties enacted, the identical resolutions that the counties enacted within weeks after the filing of this lawsuit. And in that resolution, the counties make clear that they relied on and cited approvingly the Kentucky legislature's reference to Jesus Christ as the prince of ethics. They made clear that they supported the fight of Alabama Supreme Court justice Roy Moore against the ACLU. They made absolutely clear in their legal papers that they deemed this to be a Christian nation under current law and they made clear that they absolutely intended and believed they had the right to display the Ten Commandments. They did so not in a display of history. They asserted and they intended to do so because of the religious nature of the Ten Commandments. There can be no doubt that the Ten Commandments portrays a religious point of view and is profoundly religious. The Court said so in Stone. There is no serious question about that. The question then here is whether or not the counties, in their current display, have done anything to sufficiently neutralize the endorsing message that is contained in this record. And we submit it has not done so. It now announces that the Ten Commandments are the foundation of our legal system, not just that religion is but that the Ten Commandments, a particular religious code, the word of God, it asserts is the foundation of our legal system. It asserts that the Ten Commandments, the revealed Word of God, provides the moral background of the Declaration of Independence. We think it's clear that the content of the Ten Commandments and the content of the Declaration of Independence deal with substantially different topics.
 Suppose you had a county 100 miles away or a state, a different state, and the same display was put on and the recitation was -- and it was a sincere recitation, that the government simply wanted to recognize that the 10 Commandments has played an important role in the civic lives of our people. Then you have -- they're each up for five years and five years later, some school kids wander by one and they wander by the other. In your view, from what you're telling me, the Commandments are permitted in one location and not the other? I mean, that's the necessary purport of your argument. You may not think that either of them are valid but on this prong of the argument, it seems to me that to differentiate, I just don't understand that.
 I think to an extent there is a differentiation because this Court has made clear that any assessment must depend on context. There is no fixed per se rule but rather, the context one must both look at the purpose and the effect. In gauging the purpose, one looks at both the litigation history, the social facts, the content and any changes. Here the District Court had not only the display itself but it had the announced purpose of the county. It therefore was in a unique position to gauge the purpose of the -- the true purpose of these counties. Moreover, it was in a unique position to gauge the effects that the reasonable observer in these small rural Kentucky counties, the reasonable observer assessment of this particular display. And the Court -- McCreary County is a county with only 17,000 people. Whitley City, the county seat, which is not even incorporated, has 1,100 people. The District Court from its chambers in London, Kentucky was well situated to gauge whether or not the reasonable observer, knowing the litigation history of this case and knowing the changes in the forum and the context of this display, would perceive this to be a neutral recitation of history or simply the third in a series of efforts by this county government to post the Ten Commandments because that is what it wanted to post.
 Does that mean forever? What I'm thinking -- let me spell it out. The key words in Stone would be that this was posted, the Ten Commandments, because it would lead to, in the circumstances, the students remeditate, venerate, perhaps, and obey. In other words, their reaction to it would likely be a religious reaction. Now, here if you saw it just by itself, perhaps one would be concerned with the intent or the effect of calling to the viewer's mind the sacred character of the law, which is fine for religious people to do but not necessarily fine for the State to do; and that leads them to venerate, perhaps to meditate, perhaps to consider the relationship in a religious way. If that's the problem, that would exist here only because of the history or most likely because of the history. And if that is the problem, that would dissipate over time because it is the smallness of the audience and their familiarity with the history that would likely produce the similar religious reaction to the display. Now, what's your reaction?
 I think it's a question of degree and while over time the importance of the purpose may diminish, the purpose does not fully diminish and the effect does not change substantially. It is a question of degree, it is a question of line drawing. Here there is not an effort to incorporate the Ten Commandments into a neutral display or a neutral course of study such as a compare and contrast of ancient moral codes or a comparative religion course such as many of us have taken and schools clearly can offer. It is not a neutral display of law givers like the frieze in this Court. It asserts the primacy of the Ten Commandments. It says the Ten Commandments are the moral background of the Declaration of Independence. It doesn't say there is some commonality between the Ten Commandments and some American laws. It talks not only about law. It talks about our system of government. It says the Ten Commandments, the revealed Word of God is the moral foundation of the Declaration of Independence. That in itself is an endorsement of religion in this context and I don't think that can dissipate over time.
 Why is it? It may be true. These pilgrims came for religious reasons. If all you have is a display of the origin of the law in the United States, what would be wrong with saying, this is a historical account? It's like teaching religion in the schools. Of course it stemmed from the religious beliefs of those who came to the United States. You don't mean it religiously. You mean it historically.
 It's the difference between acknowledgment and endorsement. Of course counties and other governments can acknowledge the role that religion played in history. That is very different from acknowledging religion as a general matter and asserting that a specific code that is central to specific religions is the one -- not only the one religious source but the one source, religious or moral, that provide -- religious or secular that provides the moral background of the Declaration of Independence.
 I don't care it stands for that. As you heard, the code takes various forms for various religions. And I think all it stands for is the proposition that the moral order is ordained by God. That's all it stands for. And to say that that's the basis of the Declaration of Independence and of our institutions is entirely realistic.
 What this display says --
 I don't think they're really saying that the particular commandments of the Ten Commandments are the basis of the Declaration of Independence. That's idiotic. What the commandments stand for is the direction of human affairs by God. That's what it stands for.
 Whatever the merit of that statement, that is not what these counties have said. What these counties have said in their resolutions is that the Ten Commandments are the precedent legal code of Kentucky and the central historic legal document of the state. What they have said in this display itself, in the explanation of the display, that they are the moral background of the Declaration of Independence, to the exclusion of all others, in effect. When you say the, it doesn't say one of. It says it is the foundation of our legal system. It doesn't say it had an influence on some of our laws. It asserts the primacy, the actual text of this display asserts the primacy of the Ten Commandments.
 If that's what it means, it's idiotic. I don't think anybody is going to interpret it that way. You can't get the Declaration of Independence out of the Ten Commandments.
 I would agree with that, Your Honor.
 And I don't think that's how somebody would normally read it. I think what they're saying is the principle of laws being ordained by God is the foundation of the laws of this state and the foundation of our legal system.
 How long is that resolution going to guide our view of the future displays or even the present one? What about the membership of the board of supervisors is changed? How long do we look to that particular resolution?
 I think, Your Honor, it's an element that the District Court in the first instance must accept and gauge in determining whether or not the announced secular purpose is indeed a true purpose or is a sham. Where we're talking about a close time period, here three displays in less than a year by the same officials of the same county trying to post the same document, this case becomes very close to the Santa Fe independent school district case where it's a moving target in direct response to pending litigation as an effort to try to get the same end result and changing the operative facts just slightly in the hope that eventually it will be right.
 May I ask you a question on that point? And I should know the answer. It must be in the briefs but I don't remember. I assume that they rescinded the resolution before version 3 of the display was put up, is that correct?
 That is not correct, Your Honor. The resolution was enacted in early December 1999, a couple of weeks after the display. It has never been rescinded.
 It is still on the books?
 It is still on the books. A point is made in the reply brief, it is not a binding resolution, it encourages the county judge executive to post the Ten Commandments as part of a historic display. It doesn't say post a display of documents and have a county judge choose to post the Ten Commandments. The initial paragraph of the resolution makes clear that it encourages the county judge to post the Ten Commandments and then as part of a historic display. The county judge did that. The District Court enjoined that display. The county appealed that injunction and then, after getting new lawyers, dropped its appeal. Soon after that, the county posted a third display, again, the Ten Commandments with what it called historic documents, leaving aside how the Stars Spangled Banner or the national motto as a historic document. What it did is wrap the Ten Commandments in the three or four secular documents that we all clearly acknowledge as the root of the American system of government. It did so pursuant to the same resolution. There has never been another resolution, it has not been rescinded. The resolution is there. It cites Jesus Christ as the prince of ethics, it cites legislative allusions to Jesus Christ. I think the resolution, which is cited in the joint appendix of the docket number, makes it clear that the purpose of this county was to post the Ten Commandments and to do so because of the religious nature of the Ten Commandments because of the primacy in its view of the Ten Commandments. That's what it focused on. That's what this litigation history has revealed throughout and that's what the District Court found at least at the preliminary injunction stage, which is where we still are. There has been no evidence taken in the case, no discovery taken in the case to suggest anything other than what the District Court found. And on this record, I submit that there can be no conclusion other than that the purpose of the county in posting the series of displays was to post the Ten Commandments because of their religious nature and the effect on the reasonable observer who knew what was going on, who was there to see what was transpiring in this small county was clear to the District Court. The District Court doesn't operate in a vacuum. And this Court has made clear that courts cannot turn a blind eye to a sham secular purpose. The District Court not only saw the displays, heard the arguments of counsel, saw the resolutions of the District Court, of the fiscal Court. The fiscal Court is the legislative branch of government in Kentucky. The District Court also was there in the community and could see both the public reaction, the letters to the editor, the keep the Ten Commandments signs on yards throughout the county.
 Is all of that in the record?
 That is not in the record.
 Then I don't think we should talk about it.
 The District Court was well situated to understand the social fact, historical record and arguments of both the lawyers and the parties and the statements of the parties.
 Mr. Friedman, can you tell me where in the joint appendix the resolution appears?
 Joint Appendix page 1, number 5, and it's Exhibit 1 attached to it. And that's the one of the counties. The other one is -- and these are the docket entries. The document itself is not in the joint appendix. And the other county is joint appendix page 28, number 6. They're both Exhibit 1s attached to those documents. Those documents are the county's motions to dismiss in the District Court.
 It's not printed?
 It is not in the appendix itself, no. The resolution is not in there. The citation to it from the index is there.
 It is in the record which we have?
 It is in the record. It was submitted in fact by the petitioners in this case. They submitted the resolution in support of their arguments defending the second display, the display that surrounded the Ten Commandments with the religious text. They made clear in that brief that they were asserting their right to display the Ten Commandments as part of their argument that the purpose was to demonstrate America's Christian heritage. I submit that in that brief, in that resolution, in the repeated statements of the county officials and of their counsel, the District Court was well within its discretion to determine that the purpose here was religious, was not secular and that the effect, as viewed by the reasonable observer, was religious -- was to endorse religion, not secular. If there are additional questions, I would be happy to answer it.
 The other question I have is assuming you didn't have any of this history and they started off with plan 3, would that have violated the establishment clause?
 Yes, Your Honor, I think it would. It would be a closer question but in this context, what we have is the assertion that the Ten Commandments are the source, the moral background of the Declaration of Independence, the foundation of our legal system. It is not incorporating the Ten Commandments as part of a neutral course of study. It is not like having Moses along with 15 other or 15 law givers. It is the assertion of the primacy of the Ten Commandments.
 I don't understand the difference. I mean it seems to me it would violate the establishment clause, it would equally do so if you said it's a major part of or even a part of. Now, maybe it makes it wrong to say it's the exclusive one. It may make it more wrong but we're not grading papers here. It seems to me that whether it violates the establishment clause depends upon whether you're endorsing -- whether you're proselytizing religion.
 I think that's correct, Your Honor.
 What does primacy have to do with it?
 I think it makes it an easier case when it asserts this is the one rather than one of several or one of many.
 But your real position is they wouldn't have to have done that as long as they had the Ten Commandments in the display, that would be enough?
 I think it depends on the content and context of the display.
 Exactly what we've got in Exhibit 3 or whatever it is, that we don't have the statement of purposes, we don't have them saying it's the sole source of the primacy. They say it's a source. Does that still violate the establishment clause?
 I think it does, Your Honor.
 Since you have a minute, give me your opinion to the right standard if hypothetically you start with the Goldberg-Schempp idea, that the government is not absolutely forbidden by the establishment clause to recognize the religious nature of the people nor the religious origins of much of our law and so forth but it's easy to go too far and it's easy in this area you are trading on eggs to become far more divisive than you hoped and really end up with something worse than if you stayed out in the first place. In other words, it's a very delicate matter and it's very easy to offend people. Now, suppose you start with that. You're trying to define what is too far constitutionally speaking. What's your test? Of the many that have been in our opinions, which do you think works the best for that purpose or some other?
 I think the Court's endorsement test has stood the test of time and has worked well. It allows the District Courts that are most familiar with what is actually happening to look at both the purpose and the effect of a particular display. I don't think there can be an ironclad rule. There can be presumptions. There can be brighter line tests perhaps. But I think ultimately --
 Within reason outline an approach that would say a religious display is presumptively for -- is a presumptive endorsement. I think with the Baptist brief. Would you endorse that test?
 We think that test can work very well in a context like this where we're talking about the display of religious texts rather than just symbols. And the point I think is well worth considering, that we assume that when people post signs or displays, bumper stickers, buttons, that they endorse the content of that text and that the presumption then would place a burden on government to make sure that it is neutralizing the endorsing effect of displaying text. I think that is a very workable text in a context like this where we're talking about the posting of core religious texts.
 Would you explain why you distinguish text and symbolize them? You distinguish text from the crucifix and so on. Why?
 It does depend entirely on context, to be sure, but symbols are subject to alternative interpretation. Text is not. Or text rarely is. And text such as this, religious text, cannot be seen as anything other than the revealed Word of God. I mean, here we have 120 words in the first four Commandments, 142 in the first five Commandments of this display that is a profound, detailed explication of core religious content, core religious meaning.
 I understand the text part but why not adopt the same test for the symbols? For example, why not adopt it for the Moses? The burden would be on the government to show that it was not approving, endorsing, et cetera, and in this context, that would be pretty easy. Why not have the same test?
 There is no reason why it couldn't be applied just as well. My point was simply that it's even easier to do it when there is text. The Court doesn't need to go so far as to decide whether to apply it to both text and symbol, though it certainly could. It need only go so far as say when government posts religious texts, it must be presumed to endorse the content of that text. It's a little more difficult when you're talking about symbols, depending on what the symbols are. Some symbols are far more sectarian such as the Cross, such as the Star of David, than other symbols. At least when there is text involved, one presumes that the display of text is an endorsement of the content of that text unless the content and the context make clear that it is neutralizing. The examples are obvious. The display of religious art in a government owned art museum, the playing of religious music by a government symphony orchestra, the context of the orchestra, the context of the museum are sufficient to neutralize the religious message that is contained in the display itself. Here -- and the same thing I think would be said of a comparative religion course or a compare and contrast ancient moral code course. There there is not an endorsement of a particular code, a particular text but rather a neutral educational display about several alternative ones. That is different from taking one religious code, one revealed Word of God, placing it next to the revered documents that frame the American Republic and saying, these are all alike, these are worthy of equal reverence. That is simply wrapping the Ten Commandments in the flag and, with all due respect, that constitutes endorsement. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Friedman. Mr. Staver, you have about three minutes left.
 Justice Stevens, the argument before this Court was unlike anything that went down in the District Court or the Circuit Court of Appeals because never was a resolution ever mentioned. Never did the District Court or the Sixth Circuit ever discuss the resolution. It was not mentioned in this Court until this answer brief by respondents was filed. It is not part of the District Court's decision, it was not part of the Circuit Court of Appeals. The District Court said that what imprinted every action thereafter with defiance in a taint is the mere posting of the first display. There was no resolution for that display, none is needed. There is no resolution for the foundations display.
 Was there a resolution, Counsel?
 For the second display, yes, Your Honor, there was.
 And whatever is in the record is that resolution?
 It is that resolution but it is specific to the second display because it specifically mentions what kind of documents are in that display. It is not a general display regarding posting of documents. In this case, when of the Court --
 But is it correct that it was not amended when the third display was created?
 It was not amended because it was not -- it was relevant and fact-specific in the display itself.
 It is the last expression of the governing body's intent?
 No, Your Honor. What's the last expression is the foundations display which clearly a reasonable observer would see. And if there is any doubt regarding --
 But there hasn't been a new resolution.
 There is not a new resolution.
 And that one wasn't rescinded?
 That one died, Your Honor, with the Court's ruling.
 It was adopted and it still is there, presumably?
 Presumably. There is nothing in the record that suggests what happened to it. Whether it was repealed or not. But it was specific factually only to that second display, not to the foundations display which the District Court found was fundamentally different. And if there is any doubt regarding the history of purpose, we would suggest, Justice O'Connor, your suggestion in the Wallace, that if there is any doubt regarding purpose, to look to the effects prong. And I think when you look to the effects prong, a reasonable observer will see that this is a constitutional display. This case is one in which the Sixth Circuit drew the most difficult hate, it imposed it in a subsequent action in the most difficult area of the establishment clause and clearly the public officials have substantially and fundamentally changed. They can't live under this taint forever. They tried but they could to correct their way. They tried what they could to display this in a constitutional manner so that anyone passing by would see this as one document among many others. In addition to the display itself, with all the other hundreds of documents that are on the wall, this display has a specific stated purpose.
 So presumably these things are open if it goes on to the final hearing? The preliminary injunction stage?
 Yes, the preliminary injunction. And the fact that the resolution is technically latent on the books, they are will repeal that, they repudiate that resolution. Thank you.
 Thank you. The case is submitted.
 The honorable Court is now adjourned until Monday next at 10 o'clock.
 We will now hear argument in Exxon Mobil against Saudi Basic Industries. Mr. Coleman, I trust you will soon tell us why the case is not moot or whether you think it's moot, and if -- if not, why not.
 Good morning, Justice Stevens. May it please the Court: I will begin with that, if you would like. This case is not moot because there is an ongoing case or controversy between the parties. There is a judgment, it is true, from the Delaware State court, which has now been affirmed by the Delaware Supreme Court. But preclusion doctrines not Rooker-Feldman and not mootness govern the resolution of the claims that we asserted first --
 Well, what financial interests do your clients have to keep litigating today in another court?
 I don't know the --
 What's going on? I mean, it's very confusing.
 Well, certainly, Justice O'Connor, we've not yet recovered on our judgment and that judgment is still there. It is still in existence. We've not yet collected on it. But I don't believe that mootness turns on whether you have, in fact, collected on a judgment. There are very few cases out there in which a party has, in fact, obtained two judgments, one from a State court and one from a Federal court, usually because a party waived the application of preclusion doctrines. And -- and we have conceded previously that that's not our interest. What is our interest here is that we have asserted Federal jurisdiction. This case was brought in Federal court by SABIC. During the course of discovery, we found some things out that they had been overcharging us and we indicated that we were going to bring claims against them in Federal court. They ran down to Delaware court by forum shopping in order to try to obtain a shorter statute of limitations, which turned out for them to be a strategic blunder of monumental proportions. But the Federal case, when we filed it, those claims had original jurisdiction in Federal court. They have not yet been resolved in a proper way. We --
 But do you have a continuing case or controversy? That was -- that -- that's a bedrock Article III requirement, and if you've got all the relief that you were seeking -- let's put it this way. Suppose your opponent SABIC says, here's the check for the $417 million and we undertake that we're not going to pursue any further relief. Would you have a case or controversy left?
 Yes, Your Honor. We might not have an interest in pursuing the case, but we have a legal interest in terms of Article III case or controversy. It is well established that the -- the fact of taking a judgment does not make a case moot. In fact, if there were a holding that we think that the Federal case were moot --
 But if you've got all the relief to which you are entitled, that does make a case moot.
 In terms of cases that involve injunctive relief where it is impossible for a court to give you the relief that you have -- that you are seeking, that is true. But when you are seeking money damage, it is at least theoretically possible -- we're not saying that we're going to ask for that, but at least theoretically possible that the Federal district court could still give us relief. And therefore, what we are asking for is --
 What relief could it give you?
 But what for?
 What relief? If you're paid in full, what -- what relief are you entitled to?
 Well, we think the relief that we're entitled to, in terms of this, is for the case to be remanded for the district court to resolve these issues under preclusion doctrines.
 But what issues would -- would the district court resolve?
 Preclusion.
 Well, if you win on the preclusion --
 Who cares?
 -- what do you get then in substance?
 We don't necessarily intend to take a -- another judgment in Federal court.
 Then what do you intend to do? If you win on preclusion, what do you do then?
 Well, hopefully we'll win on preclusion with respect not only to this suit, the New Jersey II suit, but also the New Jersey I suit, which we say the district -- or the Delaware judgment precludes.
 Well, I think we'd like an answer. Justice Ginsburg gives us -- gives you a hypothetical case. You've got the money. The judgment has been discharged in the State courts. What is left to do in the Federal court?
 It is likely --
 Now, the one answer I heard you give, well, we're interested in preclusion to say -- well, that's all historical at that point. Who cares?
 It -- it is likely, Your Honor -- and we have previously said -- that we may very well dismiss the case of our own accord. But that doesn't mean --
 We're looking for -- we're looking for something that makes the case live.
 Our claims are alive. There are claims there that seek relief --
 But we're -- we're questioning why that is and we're asking you what relief you need to get that you wouldn't get in the hypothetical that Justice Ginsburg posed.
 We thought we would not seek further monetary relief.
 So what --
 Do you know how many claims in this case that -- that were not in the Delaware case?
 We have affirmative defenses to the New Jersey I, but -- but the claims in New Jersey II and Delaware are the same, Your Honor.
 Is your answer that you might want equitable relief, an injunction to continue making payments in the future, or something like that?
 No, Your Honor. We're not seeking additional monetary or equitable relief.
 You -- you would be stuck anyway because you made a counterclaim and -- and it would be -- on which you prevailed. And in that counterclaim you would be precluded if you didn't ask for everything that you could get. But -- but at this stage at least, the -- the door -- there -- there is still conceivably an avenue of further litigation because, SABIC hasn't yet said that it's not going to do anything more, that it isn't going to petition for cert, for example.
 And, indeed, Your Honor. I mean, SABIC has represented to the Court that it likely intends to seek certiorari relief from this Court in the Delaware suit.
 So it has --
 So if they do, it's not finished.
 It is not finished --
 Yes, all right. I'll ask them that.
 Getting back to the Rooker-Feldman issue, which is the issue on which the Court granted cert, Rooker-Feldman is a narrow, limited doctrine, but it bars only appellate review not parallel litigation in Federal district courts. Rooker-Feldman is not a theory of vanishing original jurisdiction, nor is it a jurisdictional substitute for the preclusion analysis mandated by Congress in the Full Faith and Credit Act. The expansive interpretation asserted by SABIC misperceives the fundamental nature of appellate review. It's untethered to any natural negative implication in 28 U.S.C. 1257. It illegitimately displaces the application of section 1738, the Full Faith and Credit Act, in most cases to which it is traditionally applied, and it serves absolutely no useful purpose.
 Well, the problem that bothers me -- and I don't know that there's an answer to it -- is you have plaintiff. Plaintiff goes into State court. He brings a lawsuit, a tort suit, a contract suit. And then he decides he'd also like to go to Federal court. He brings exactly the same suit. And here we have two suits and exactly the same thing running along at the same time. Now, I know there are principles from this Court's case law that says, well, that's what's supposed to happen. They've always bothered me. But now let's take a special instance. The special instance is that in court one in the State, the plaintiff loses. Now, what he decides to do is to say to the Federal court, we want you to review what they did in the State court. Can't do that. Right?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Okay. So he brilliantly figures out I will omit the word review from my -- from my motion. I will ask for precisely the same thing just not use that word review. I will ask them to go and make their decision which happens to be -- in my opinion should be -- 100 percent the opposite of what the State court did showing they're wrong. But I won't use the word review. Now, you say because he cut the word review out, he can do it.
 No, Justice Breyer. It's not because he cut the review out. Rooker-Feldman is an issue of appellate -- the exercise of appellate jurisdiction. So what does appellate jurisdiction mean? Well, appellate --
 Mr. Coleman, would you clarify, I think, in response to Justice Breyer's inquiry? Rooker-Feldman both involved State court litigation that was over and done with. Then you come to the Federal court. You have two parallel cases would be -- brought within a month of each other?
 Within 2 months of each other. Within a month of each other, Your Honor.
 And isn't the standard defense of the person who has started the other suit first, well, Your Honor, prior action pending, please hold the case that started second in abeyance till we get done? And if we win in the first case, then it will be precluded. Then the second case -- the parallel case will be precluded. That's not Rooker-Feldman territory.
 That's -- that's -- Your Honor, that's our position that -- concurrent jurisdiction is a separate issue from the appellate review issue that Rooker-Feldman raises. Justice Breyer, the answer to your hypothetical is that appellate review is something different from having a parallel action. Appellate review is probably best defined by two characteristics that I'll try to flesh out for you. The first is that the proponent alleges some sort of injury-causing error by the trial court and not by the adversary and then seeks an order reversing, vacating, or otherwise nullifying that lower court order. When a party alleges an injury by his adversary rather than the trial court, the most that can really be said is that you are continuing on a parallel litigation but not that you are seeking appellate review. You do not have what looks like appellate review. You're not alleging errors by the lower court. You're not seeking an order that directly nullifies or otherwise undoes the State court judgment.
 No, but the argument -- it seems to me the argument is that in a de facto sense, when you try to litigate the Federal case, after losing the State case, you in effect are asking the Federal court in some sense to review what happened in the State court. Justice Ginsburg's answer to that is preclusion is the answer. Is that your answer?
 Absolutely.
 Because if that -- if that is -- if we accept that as the answer, then there's no argument for saying you should expand Rooker-Feldman to include the de facto review as opposed to the -- the very strict sense of review that you're talking about.
 That is absolutely our position, Justice Souter, that preclusion addresses all of these issues.
 Well, but can you -- can you expand on this a little? I'm not taking a view on it. I'm trying to clear up what's a confusion in my mind. I see how you could do this on the parallel business with -- with delaying it on the docket and using the doctrine of preclusion. I understand that. But we've still got this doctrine called Rooker Feldman out there, and as long as you have that doctrine, it strikes me as odd if -- say, it weren't a plaintiff. Say it was the losing party, you know, that was asking the Federal judge, Judge, you have this case on your docket. Let's move it up. Let's decide it now. He doesn't use the word review, but everything else is the same. He wants a decision out of that court that is going to be the opposite of what the State court did. And what's concerning me -- maybe I shouldn't be concerned, but what's concerning me is whether he can get it or not seems to turn completely on whether he uses the word review in the petition.
 I don't -- I don't think that that is true. It should not and does not turn on the words that you use in your petition. What it turns on is the fundamental nature of the injury that you claim and of the relief that you seek. One reason why you don't need to be necessarily concerned about this is that in all of these cases in which one case has gone to judgment and there is a -- either a continuation or a new case, preclusion is going to cover these. The only extension of Rooker-Feldman that SABIC is asking for is what they call the actually litigated test. That is the heart of the Full Faith and Credit Act.
 Rooker-Feldman, if I understand it correctly, is a subject matter jurisdiction bar. Is that --
 Yes, Your Honor. It --
 Yes. And --
 -- it arises from a negative implication taken from section 1257 and a second negative implication from 1331.
 Well, to -- so if the two lawsuits, the State court suit and the Federal suit -- they're proceeding concurrently or one is held in abeyance waiting the other, there is certainly subject matter jurisdiction in the Federal court of the Federal action.
 Yes.
 To apply Rooker-Feldman in that context would say you had subject matter jurisdiction at the outset, but then you lost it somewhere down the line.
 And -- and -- yes, Justice Ginsburg. And that's a distinction between your hypothetical and Justice Breyer's. Justice Breyer's, as I -- if I understand it correctly, is that the Federal suit starts after the State court is done. Yours is where you have parallel actions at the same time. And where the Federal claims are parallel or even filed first, as in our case, you can't say that the moment you file those that you're seeking review of some nonexistent State court judgment. You're simply asking for relief from something that your adversary did to you. And the argument that SABIC makes that the court relinquishes jurisdiction has no basis or justification in anything this Court has ever said. It is a theory of vanishing jurisdiction that I cannot understand.
 Suppose --
 Mr. Coleman, can I interrupt with a question?
 Of course.
 Is it your position that what should have been done in this case, not in the hypothetical case, is the trial court should have just stayed the action pending the outcome of the Delaware case?
 And, in fact, that's what the Federal district court had done, Your Honor.
 And that's what -- he did -- that was correct.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 And then when the Delaware case was over, then what should he have done?
 Well, we could either ultimately dismiss it or the Federal district court could say, looks like your Delaware case is over. SABIC brings a motion --
 And -- and he has given you all the relief your entitled to. Therefore, you go ahead and dismiss the case.
 Yes, or SABIC brings a motion --
 And therefore, my next question is why shouldn't we do exactly that now.
 Because the question before the Court today is a question of jurisdiction, not of practical consequences other than the mootness question that SABIC has raised. But practical consequences are that what we may --
 Well, maybe we could vacate the judgment of the court of appeals, say that was wrong, but still, order it dismissed after we vacate the judgment.
 I think, as in Feldman, that's a question that should be first addressed by the district court. Certainly we hope that you will vacate or reverse the Third Circuit's judgment and allow the district court to address those issues. Perhaps we dismiss it.
 But if you don't tell us what issue remains, I don't know why we shouldn't just direct the suit to be dismissed.
 There -- there is a live -- in -- in the terms of Article III, there are live claims that remain pending before the district court. And while it is true --
 And I take it that's because you don't have the cert period expired yet in the first action and you don't have the check.
 At the very minimum --
 Okay. It's -- if the 3 months is expired and the check is in your hand and it's certified, what's left?
 As a practical matter, we have no intention. As a jurisdictional matter, there's still --
 I'm not asking about your intention. Let's assume you do intend to litigate further. What for?
 If we did intend to litigate further, SABIC would be entitled to go to the district court and say they can't. They are precluded.
 I want -- I want an answer to my question. What are you going to litigate for? What's left?
 Well, again, setting aside our intentions and hypothetically, there are cases in which --
 I'm talking about your case. What's left?
 We -- we do not seek -- will not seek any further review from the district court.
 Nothing is left.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Now, suppose you don't have the check. What's left?
 Well, the case is still up in the air.
 Why?
 Because --
 You have a judgment.
 -- the case -- the case is not over. Indeed, because the State --
 I never heard of a case that isn't over until you get the check. I thought the case is over when you have the judgment. (Laughter.)
 And then if they don't give you the check, you have a different matter. We have to get it enforced.
 There is a different matter. But as a matter of Article III jurisdiction, Your Honor, the -- the mootness doctrine does not apply to a situation where you have a judgment and it doesn't necessarily apply the moment you get paid.
 Suppose that you lost in the State court and the judgment is final. You then go to Federal court. Are -- is there a context in which Rooker Feldman might then be applicable? This is all hypothetical.
 Our argument is that it would be applicable only if the injury that we claimed in our Federal suit was an injury caused by the State court -- the court itself or the judge rather than our adversary and we sought relief from that judgment. That would obtain the nature of appellate jurisdiction rather than we say, well, SABIC did us wrong, we'd like a judgment. And then SABIC can come in and say, well, they're precluded. They already tried that.
 In other words, if you had some ongoing relation and, in this hypothetical, the State court ruled against you and you went in to try to reverse that ruling, that would be -- that would Rooker-Feldman.
 Yes. If we alleged harm from the court and sought relief from the court's judgment.
 There were only the two cases, Rooker and Feldman, that established this.
 Yes.
 Has this Court ever said anything to suggest that Rooker-Feldman, as apart from preclusion doctrine, applies to parallel litigation instead of you go into Federal court after the State court is over and you're trying to undo what the State court did?
 I don't think this Court has ever held any such thing, and I think it would be inconsistent with at least Feldman itself. The idea of -- of appellate jurisdiction over the constitutional claims in Feldman that were held not to be barred comes down in the end -- SABIC says, well, those claims weren't actually litigated. But the opinion itself on page 467 points out that the Mr. Feldman had raised his constitutional claims in front of the D.C. Court of Appeals in terms of asking for his waiver. And when I checked the oral argument transcript from the Feldman case, it was mentioned specifically in terms of Mr. Feldman had raised the constitutional claims in front of the D.C. Court. And that's on pages 9, 14, and 16 of the LEXIS version of the oral argument transcript.
 But there's no preclusion unless they're also decided.
 Yes. Well, yes. The district court could then decide whether in fact they were precluded, and -- and it's likely that they were. I didn't follow up on what happened when the case went back down on remand. But the Court said, we're not going to decide that. We will allow the district court to address that in the first instance. And so we think that the actually litigated revision of Rooker-Feldman is simply inconsistent with Feldman itself, that it improperly displaces full faith and credit that is not true to the negative implication from section 1257 which has to be a very narrow implication, indeed, because 1257 gives this Court jurisdiction, and it's only appellate jurisdiction, to suggest that another court doesn't have that appellate jurisdiction must be -- must be narrowly limited to the context, the type of lawsuits that this Court would seek, which is not simply they did me wrong, please -- please give me money, but rather, that lower court erred. It violated my rights. It is structurally or in some -- in violation of Federal rights or something that the court did and that you have been asked to fix. That, we think, is consistent with the proper negative implication from 1257, but overrunning most of preclusion law simply is not. For these reasons, we would ask the Court to reverse. And, Justice Stevens, I would like to reserve the remainder of my time.
 You may do so. Mr. Castanias. I hope you'll tell us also whether you think the case is moot before you're through.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case is moot. There is nothing for Exxon Mobil to get at this --
 Well, you're still asking for cert.
 That's right, and that's --
 Well, then why is it moot? Because something could happen. We might get this case in theory, take it on cert, and discover a jurisdictional problem that somehow destroys the case without a decision, and should that happen, there luckily for them they have this other case going. So as long as -- you're prepared, I take it, to say you're going to ask for cert. If that's what you're going to say, I don't see how the case is over. It's up to you.
 Okay. Well, I'm -- I'm not going to take the Hobson's choice, Your Honor, but I am going to tell you, first of all, that SABIC is going to apply for cert. At least that's my current understanding. And second of all, that shows why this case is not justiciable at this point because if the most likely event in the -- in the event of this Court's review of the Delaware determination, is a reversal on a statute of limitations problem. That's the reason this suit was brought as the, quote, insurance policy that the Third Circuit identified, which was if the Delaware Supreme Court or the Delaware Superior Court had kicked this suit on the ground of the 3-year statute of limitations -- and if you look at page 20a of the supplemental brief, the corrected supplemental brief that we filed with the Court, including the Delaware Supreme Court's opinion, you'll see that they had a whale of a time getting over the plain language of their own statute.
 All right. If for -- somehow you won on that, even though it sounds a little like a State law issue, but nonetheless, if you won on that and they reversed it as a statute of limitations, then what they're saying is, well, that's just why we filed in Federal court. We didn't want the Federal court to review the State court. We wanted our Federal court suit as an insurance policy in case something goes wrong with the State court suit. It has nothing whatsoever to do with Rooker-Feldman. It is parallel adjudication, just what he said. Now, what's your response?
 My response, Justice Breyer, is twofold. First of all, with regard to the mootness question, if that eventuality occurs, that's the time when there may be a justiciable issue for a Federal district court. Not now. We've been talking about ifs and hypotheticals and what may happen in the future.
 Mr. Castanias, was there a proper case in the district court when the complaint was initially filed there some 2 months after you filed in Delaware?
 We've never disputed that, Justice Ginsburg.
 All right. So you can bring two cases, identical cases, in two different courts, and that's an everyday thing, and the defense is prior action pending.
 Right.
 Now, you are urging that Rooker-Feldman which this Court never applied when you had parallel litigation be extended into a domain which is ordinarily taken care of by preclusion doctrine. Why would you want to mix those two things up that now seem to me rather clear, that if you have Rooker-Feldman, when you rush into a Federal court and say, Federal court, undo that State court judgment, I don't like it? Rooker was just a paradigm case of that. Why would you want to spread that doctrine? What is -- what is there that preclusion doctrine doesn't accomplish?
 Well, Justice Ginsburg, preclusion doctrine may accomplish this in a certain number of cases, but I think it's important -- and I think I have to correct my colleague on the other side here with regard to the state of the record. Yes, there was a stay of the New Jersey II trial court litigation, but it wasn't because of the Colorado River application that we made. In fact, if you'll look in the appendix to the petition --
 Well, I'm not talking about anything fancy like Colorado River. Prior action pending is a familiar defense. You've got two actions. They could even be in different districts of the same State and one says, Your Honor, this case started second, the other one is going forward, hold it abeyance because there's a prior action pending. That's not Colorado River abstention or anything like that.
 Well, I -- I think, Your Honor, you will see that that is a component of Colorado River, and that was part of the application that we made to the district court in this case under Colorado River. And my only answer -- the only reason that I'm bringing this up, Justice Ginsburg, is that if you'll look in the appendix to the petition for certiorari, you will see that SABIC, my client, made an application for Colorado River abstention, and the district court denied that. The district court denied that in this case.
 Well, sometimes district judges rule incorrectly, but -- but what happened here is the district court case did not go on because the two of you, both sides, said, okay, the district court -- they're all bollixed up with this Foreign Sovereign Immunity Act, so we're going to agree. You agreed that the case would go forward in Delaware, the trial in Delaware. Is that not so?
 Well, it was -- it was -- if you'll look at -- I believe this is at page 8a of the addendum to the red brief. You'll see that it was Exxon Mobil that pushed in Delaware, but that actually happened before the ruling on sovereign immunity, that -- that they elected to go forward in Delaware.
 Well, when you say they pushed in Delaware, you brought them into Delaware and a -- in a reverse suit. You wanted a declaration of non liability.
 Right.
 They brought their case for liability in the Federal forum. They were forced by you into the Delaware forum, and now you're saying you were pushed, that Exxon pushed. You brought the case in Delaware. They didn't.
 We -- that is true that we brought the initial case, but the case was eventually tried on their counterclaims. The case was inverted to make them the party plaintiff. They went first at trial and is it -- at the page I cited to you, that was where they decided to go forward with the Delaware case.
 But it was your preferred forum, not theirs. When they filed their complaint, they filed it in New Jersey where they had a related case pending. So you chose the forum.
 That -- that is absolutely the case with regard to the Delaware matter. But I think what your question is getting at -- and I think I have to go back a couple of minutes in our colloquy here to talk about why abstention won't do the work in this case. In the lion's share of cases, it probably will, Your Honor, but in this case it didn't. And this brings me back to Justice Breyer's question which said -- in which he said that -- that concurrent jurisdiction has always bothered him because what you're ending up with is a race to judgment. But it's important again, Justice Breyer. It's a race to judgment.
 Well, that's -- you see, Justice Ginsburg answered that. I -- I mean, she wasn't answering my question, but she did say what was a perfectly satisfactory approach, that -- that the second person says, you know, Judge, there's another one pending and the judge says, okay, we'll let that go first except in some unusual instance.
 Which happens thousands of times in -- in all of the courts. It's very common and I don't know why we're over-designing this vehicle. It's simply other action pending. End of case.
 Justice Kennedy --
 Or end of argument, not end of case. (Laughter.)
 So why isn't it that the end? I mean, here it's not moot. They filed the other action. You point out that you not only think something could wreck the State claim, you would love it to wreck the State claim. And -- and therefore, they have this insurance policy in Federal court which they'll gear up if and when the State claim does get wrecked as you hope.
 Justice Breyer, I think this is the point in the argument where I want to turn to the definition of review as this Court has -- has put it forth in cases like ASARCO. This is a case that Exxon Mobil dismisses in their reply brief as mere dictum. I don't think that this -- the discussion of Rooker-Feldman and the ASARCO case can be dismissed as dictum in that it was a specific response to a specific proposal by the United States appearing as amicus to dismiss the case for lack of standing and instead remit plaintiffs to pursuing a second suit. In that case, the Court wrote that to re adjudicate -- and I'm quoting here from the opinion, and I don't have the particular page here -- to re-adjudicate the very same issues that were determined in the State court proceedings would be -- again quoting -- in essence, an attempt to obtain direct review of the Arizona Supreme Court's decision in the lower Federal courts. In ASARCO, there was no reference to what the intent of the plaintiffs was. There was no reference to what the timing of the lawsuits was. It was simply that identical issues actually litigated.
 So perhaps the Court, if it had been more cautious, would have spoken not in terms of Rooker-Feldman or review, but in terms of this matter has been decided. It is claim-precluded. That's what preclusion doctrine is supposed to do. So in that context, maybe this Court used the wrong word. Maybe it should have said, you litigated it, it's over and done with, now it's precluded. Why do you need to interject the word review? Isn't that -- unless you're going to say every time court A decides a case and then you're in court B and someone is raising the same claim, that is a review of court number one rather than you're precluded in court two because of what is -- has been litigated and decided in court one.
 Well, first of all, Justice Ginsburg, I'm hesitant to say that this Court was incautious in its use of words. This was --
 It is sometimes.
 But -- understandably, but -- but with regard to -- with regard to Rooker-Feldman, it was not just -- it was not just an accidental -- incidental invocation of it. It was the reason for the rejection of the argument. The reason was not res judicata. The reason was respect for the dignity of the State court's work in the case, and that's ultimately --
 That's why one has preclusion because you are giving respect, full faith and credit, to a decision elsewhere. That's what preclusion doctrine is all about. We respect the judgment of the court that rendered it. We, therefore, give it full faith and credit. That's what preclusion doctrine is about, is about respect and credit. Isn't that so?
 That's -- that's -- that is -- that is generally right, Justice Ginsburg, but at the same time, there -- we all agree -- Exxon Mobil, SABIC, and the decisions of this Court -- that there has to be some overlap with regard to Rooker-Feldman and SABIC -- and -- excuse me -- and -- and preclusion doctrine. The -- the argument made by Exxon Mobil, which is, in essence, the same question you're asking me, would have destroyed any reason whatsoever for the Rooker and the Feldman cases, as well as the ASARCO case. There's also a significant body of law that's body of law that's been built up over the last 85 years in the lower courts in -- in this regard. And --
 But you --
 So some of the lower courts have given a broad interpretation to Rooker-Feldman and have turned it into something other than the narrower view of it. And I think that's why we granted cert in this case, to decide whether to give it a broad or a narrow interpretation. The Third Circuit applies a rather broad interpretation of it.
 Well, I -- I guess in that respect, Justice O'Connor, I disagree because the Third Circuit, admitted by its own words, applies a very narrow version of Rooker-Feldman. And, in fact, using this case as the vehicle to decide this, the -- the definition of Rooker-Feldman in this instance amounts to no more than barring jurisdiction in a second Federal suit over the identical claims. This is not a case where you have to worry about claims that might have been brought, the sort of things that footnote 16 in Feldman dealt with.
 But maybe that isn't a proper application of Rooker-Feldman where the complaint is not about something the State court has improperly done.
 Well --
 It isn't. And so in that sense, the Third Circuit has a rather broader view of it I'd say.
 Well, to be sure, Justice O'Connor, the Third Circuit's view is broader than that which appears to be adopted by the Ninth Circuit, as well as the Seventh Circuit. And I think this brings me back to the definition of review. The -- the Ninth and Seventh Circuits' views in our estimation are wrong because they strictly look to the subjective intent of the plaintiff and as to whether the plaintiff is, in fact, seeking reversal. That -- that's the term that's used in these cases. Noel says seeking to set aside. But section 1257 --
 Of course, that's the language that was used in both Rooker and Feldman too I think.
 And that's because, Justice Stevens, that's -- that was the particular fact pattern of this -- of that case.
 And that's the only fact pattern any of our cases have dealt with.
 That's -- in the Supreme Court, that's right.
 And the -- and the concern is I think -- at least as I understand the -- the concern with it, it -- it boils down to something like this. Somebody comes along and says, don't apply claim preclusion. Don't apply it because, for whatever reason, there's this -- there's something wrong here, and -- and Federal court should determine the -- in fact, the -- the claim preclusion of the State judgment should not apply. The answer to that is, look, that's an issue to be raised by way of appeal of your State judgment. You don't appeal State judgments in Federal court. Out. There's no such claim being made here. The only claim that's being made here or the only conceivable claim, I guess, that can be made here is that we might want to do some litigating in the Federal case after the State case is over. There's no claim here that claim preclusion should not apply in that instance, and because there's no such argument that claim preclusion does not apply, the answer to the problem that you're worried about is simply claim preclusion doctrine. There's no reason to add a perihelion or something onto Rooker-Feldman to deal with what is really a very simple problem and that is, if they try to relitigate anew in Federal court, as Justice Ginsburg says, you -- you plead claim preclusion. Simple. Why do we need to complicate it beyond that simplicity?
 Well, Justice Souter, I -- I don't have any qualms with the application of claim preclusion here. The -- the Third Circuit, though, was being -- was being sensitive to the interests of the State courts, as well as sensitive to the fact that it had another jurisdictional issue in front of it, which was subject matter jurisdiction under the FSIA. And I'm -- I'm certain, as certain can be, that that court would have reached the same result if res judicata had been before it. But the -- the fact is that Rooker-Feldman is there and, again, as -- as with my response to Justice Ginsburg earlier, your -- your question would effectively rub out any need for even Rooker and Feldman themselves.
 Well, no, because the -- it -- it would not rule out the need to have some answer when someone in a Federal court comes along and says, don't apply claim preclusion, whatever the reason may be. Don't apply the claim preclusion rules. There's something unfair about doing it here. The answer to that is, look, what you're really asking us to do, when you say don't apply claim preclusion, is to review what happened in the State court, and we don't sit as an appellate court on State courts. So there's still something for Rooker Feldman to do on, as it were, Justice -- Justice Ginsburg's claim preclusion argument.
 Well, Justice Souter, I think again, with respect to the hypothetical that you've put to me, the claim preclusion is appropriately --
 It'll get the -- it'll get the job done that you say will need to be done if you get to that point.
 It -- it should get the job done.
 Why won't it?
 Well, there -- there are -- first of all, there are no guarantees. The -- the preclusion doctrines are -- are riddled with exceptions.
 Then -- then you --
 The preclusion doctrine --
 Then -- then you appeal. Don't ask for a new body of law. Just say, look, you got the application of claim preclusion wrong in this case. We're going to appeal.
 I -- I disagree, Justice Souter, that -- that we're asking for anything like a huge, new body of law or that the Third Circuit was making a huge, new body of law.
 Well, you're asking us to extend Rooker-Feldman beyond where this Court has taken it, and if I recall correctly, you really didn't ask for this. The Third Circuit injected Rooker-Feldman into the case. Is that not true?
 Well, that's true, Justice Ginsburg, but it's true because of the briefing cycle. When we briefed the case, there was no Delaware judgment. And it was only on the eve of oral argument --
 Ms. Castanias --
 Yes.
 -- could -- could I come back to mootness? One -- one could say that not only is claim preclusion the answer to Rooker-Feldman, it's also the answer to the asserted mootness here. I mean, you -- you don't have to move to dismiss it as moot. All you have to do is move to dismiss because of a prior adjudication that has resolved this question. Do you know of any case in which the existence of a prior judgment in another court has been held to render a suit that someone wants to press to get a second judgment moot? I mean, you'd think there would be a case on that, and I suppose the reason there isn't is that because the other side is always going to plead res judicata.
 Well, or the other side is going to give up.
 Or give up. But is there any case in which mootness is established by the fact that there is a prior judgment of another court giving you what you are asking for from this Court?
 Well, Justice Scalia, in the -- in the realm that we're talking about here, the Fourth Circuit's decision in the Friedman's case came to a mootness conclusion. We've also cited in our brief -- and I don't recall the names of them off the top of my head -- two cases in which the Court either -- either dismissed or remanded for consideration of mootness in light of another State court judgment. So I think there is -- there is a body of law, but I also know that it is -- as recently as yesterday looking at Wright and Miller on this issue, that when complete relief has been accorded by another tribunal, that is the classic case of mootness.
 Well, I -- I don't know why -- well, if it's -- if it were so classic, there would be a lot of cases, and I don't -- I'm not sure that any of yours are right on point. And -- and I think the reason is that you don't need it, that claim preclusion is -- is the remedy for the party who wants to get out of it.
 Well, and again, I'm -- I'm certainly not going to fight claim preclusion because this is a suit that should not be here. This is -- this has had moving parts since we -- since the petition was granted with the Delaware Supreme Court ruling and now with yesterday's denial of reargument in the Delaware Supreme Court. What --
 Why is it moot? Or even on -- why does claim preclusion apply? I mean, if you win, from what you've said -- somehow convince us that this refusal to apply the State statute of limitations properly violated some Federal law, let's say -- then that would show that the State statute of limitations applied and barred their claim. Would that be sufficient to knock out the Federal suit too?
 I'm not sure I understand the question, Justice Breyer.
 I mean, is -- does the State statute of limitations, if -- if it applied to the State's case, does it also apply in the Federal cases, the identical ground that everybody agrees that the State statute governs?
 The -- the -- there could be -- there could be issue-preclusive grounds on such a ruling, Justice Breyer, but -- but --
 I mean, if you -- if you win, then -- then -- if you win your State case, because of the argument you made, do you also automatically win the Federal case? Is it the same issue?
 I -- I don't think I could say that at this point because --
 So it may not be the same issue. Then -- then they say, okay, it's not going to be claim preclusion, and you'd have to say insofar as it's not the same issue, it's not claim preclusion. And therefore, they could proceed with their Federal case, which is what they want to do I guess.
 And -- and that is a future event.
 Yes. So we can't say it's moot in any -- and we can't say there's an alternative basis where they'd win, can we? I mean, I'm saying -- I'm thinking if we get into conference, we're discussing this case, and I say, well, I have to think this through, is it the case that if you're right and you end up winning in this Court, that their case in Federal court is over? I think no, it may not be. The answer is it may not be. Then this is not moot at all. This is not claim-precluded at all. They then might proceed with their Federal claim.
 Well, I -- I guess, Justice Breyer --
 Is that right or not?
 I don't think it's right.
 Because?
 And -- and I think the reason it's not right is because that just shows that there's no live controversy right now. That's a controversy that might happen in the future.
 Oh, well, but that -- that isn't fair to them because, for all I know, they filed the Federal case because there's a different statute of limitations, say, that governs it that will have expired if you don't let them file it by the time -- until this whole thing is over. They just wanted it as protection.
 Well, two answers to that, Justice Breyer. First of all, that seems to be a -- a place for State doctrines of tolling to apply, not Federal law. Second of all, this Court in -- in Heck against Humphrey, which we cited in our brief, solves this --
 That's explaining the unclear by the incredibly hard to understand.
 I'm sorry. I'm sorry, Justice Breyer.
 It's explaining the unclear by reference to the incomprehensible. But go ahead. (Laughter.)
 I think I wrote that opinion. (Laughter.)
 And indeed, you did, Justice Scalia.
 I never did like it. (Laughter.)
 I -- I've also gotten that impression. But -- but Heck I think teaches an important -- Heck teaches an important lesson for this case as well, which is that Heck was just a suit for money damages, just like this suit. And -- and yet, this Court said that there's going to be no cause of action under section 1983 because of the intersection of 1983 and habeas. Well, we have the same result here. There should be no Federal court case here because of the intersection of section 1257 --
 No, no, because it's where you walk in the door. And you started out by saying this case, I think as you must, was a proper Federal case. It was properly filed in -- and it was properly filed in Delaware. So you can't talk about a case that says, if you've got this kind of case, you go in this door. If that kind of case, you go in that door. You have a case here that could go in either door, the Federal, the State. The usual rule is, is it not, that if Federal jurisdiction attaches, it doesn't get lost because of subsequent events. For example, if a defendant moves into the plaintiff's State and the only basis for Federal jurisdiction is diversity, subject matter jurisdiction isn't lost, is it?
 No, and in fact, the case that's cited against us for that proposition, the Freeport McMoran case, makes clear, in the portion of it not cited by Exxon Mobil, that that rule is limited to the diversity context. And it's not -- it -- it does not have its genesis in statute, but it's in policy. We don't want to keep people from moving across State lines. We don't want to -- want to impede their -- their free movement. So we're going to look at it at the time of filing. But what we have here is a case where maybe it was original jurisdiction when the case was filed, but it's not original anymore.
 Maybe. It's not -- it's not maybe --
 Well, in this case, yes. In this case, yes. But original jurisdiction when the case was filed but not anymore because there's nothing original about it.
 A case can become moot, but we've already expressed considerable doubt whether that is the fate of this case. The notion -- you used it derisively -- the insurance policy. Lawyers bring protective actions all the time, don't they? There's nothing wrong with doing that.
 Well, I guess I come back to -- to where I started with Justice Breyer on the -- on the merits of the Rooker-Feldman issue this morning, which is that the concurrent jurisdiction is something to be dealt with. This Court has an uneasy body of law in the abstention area dealing with the issue of concurrent jurisdiction, but what it doesn't have is anything that deals with judgments, once you get to a judgment.
 May I ask you? It's perhaps an unfair question. The Chief Justice generally likes to confine our attention to cases of this Court rather than the courts of appeals for our primary guidance, and most of the Rooker-Feldman law is court of appeals law, as we -- we both know. Going back just to Rooker and to Feldman, those two cases, and putting aside ASARCO for a minute, which of those two cases do you think provides you the stronger support, if indeed any support, between Rooker and Feldman?
 Well, I -- I would have to say that Feldman, of the two of them, is probably stronger support.
 And that is the case in which the court of appeals was itself a party to the litigation.
 That's right. But at the same time, the -- the Rooker case also dealt with relitigation of the identical issues. And if I could just sum up here, seeing that the light is on here, the issue in this case is limited to identical lawsuits, identical claims. The Third Circuit's decision in this case, if it constitutes an extension of Rooker-Feldman at all, is only a modest extension because it recognizes, consistent with ASARCO, consistent with Heck, and consistent with the very notion, Justice Souter, of de facto appeals, not actual appeals, but de facto appeals being prohibited by the doctrine -- it recognizes that claims actually litigated in a State suit to a judgment, if they are litigated anew in the Federal court, that is de facto appellate review. The judgment of the Third Circuit should be affirmed.
 Thank you, Mr. Castanias. Mr. Coleman, you have 8 and a half minutes left.
 And I'll take just a few of them, Your Honor. I believe the concession that the Federal court exercised original jurisdiction at the time our case was filed is an important concession because I simply do not see yet still any rationale for this idea of vanishing original jurisdiction. I also see the concession made in response to -- to your question, Justice Breyer, about what happens if they win on the statute of limitations issue. Well, one of the cases they cite on page 12, footnote 5 of their brief, the Northern Natural Gas case itself makes clear -- and there are other cases. They went to Delaware to apply the Delaware statute of limitations. They conceded in front of the Delaware Supreme Court that even if they had won that, it wouldn't bar another lawsuit in a different forum applying a different statute of limitations. The only way they could even hope to get the shorter statute was in Delaware. The Delaware statute would never apply to our Federal claims, so that if somehow it went back on that procedural ground, it would not bar a trial in Federal court. We don't think that that's likely to happen, but that is another explanation yet of why it's moot. We also cited to the Court the Male case. It is an old case, but it does make clear that when there is the question of jurisdiction before the court and some other court rules on the merits, that does not make the case moot. In fact, you really wouldn't have a need for claim preclusion if that were the rule in -- in mootness, because once the case is final over there, they'd all be moot, and you wouldn't need to apply --
 Well, that depends on who wins.
 You're right.
 I mean, if you lost in the other suit, your claim here wouldn't be moot. I mean, it -- it would be precluded, but it's certainly not moot.
 I -- I think that's right. I'd also like to address, just very briefly, the ASARCO question. The language that the Court used in there we don't necessarily think was loose or inappropriate, Justice Ginsburg, and the reason was the Court cites at that point an amicus brief by the United States and it cites a particular footnote. And what that footnote says is it's a recommendation that the mining company in that case could file a Federal lawsuit seeking a judgment that the invalidation of the statute was not necessary. But by challenging the invalidation itself, that -- that looks more like a direct challenge to the State court judgment. It's not simply a relitigation. So that behind the Court's language there -- and of course, it was really just addressing standing. It was not directly addressing Rooker-Feldman. But the U.S.'s suggestion in that case was a suit challenging the State court judgment, and in that situation, it looks more like appellate review, more likely to infringe upon Rooker Feldman-type interests. In the end, we believe that preclusion doctrines adequately cover all of this, that it is not true --
 Mr. Coleman, I don't mean to take your time, but in the ASARCO case, was the State court judgment final at the time in dispute?
 Your Honor, there's a question about that. I mean, the Court kept jurisdiction, but there was a determination that the statute was invalidate -- was invalid and then a remand back to the district court for further proceedings.
 Because if the judgment were final, then that would fit right into your -- your analysis, if the judgment of the State court were final.
 Yes, Your Honor, it would.
 Yes.
 In the -- at the end of the day, we believe that this Court's preclusion jurisprudence is not riddled with vagaries, that it's not difficult to understand, and that it's certainly not more vague or difficult than the borrowing that they are attempting to do to bring existing preclusion doctrines into -- in order to expand Rooker-Feldman. Preclusion is the answer in this case. We believe that the district court should be permitted to address that in the first instance, and we would ask the Court to reverse the judgment of the Third Circuit. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Coleman. The case is submitted.
 The Court will now hear argument in Ballard against the Commissioner of Internal Revenue. Mr. Shapiro.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Judge Cudahy stated in his dissent in the Seventh Circuit that disclosure of the rule 183 report in this case should be required on both statutory and constitutional grounds. As Judge Cudahy put it, there is no item of more significance in evaluating a Tax Court's decision on fraud than the unfiltered findings of the STJ.
 Mr. Shapiro, can this case, in your view, be decided solely on the statutory question?
 Oh, yes, Your Honor. We believe it can.
 There also are due process allegations, and I'm not sure I even quite understand what the precise due process violation is that's alleged. But I would like you to address both and to tell us, first of all, how it would be resolved solely on a statutory basis from your perspective.
 The readiest ground for decision is the statutory basis, and we believe that the statute is a good means to avoid a complex due process question. There are two statutes that are key here. One is the appellate review statute. The other is the public record statute. The public record statute says all reports of the Tax Court are public records, and we're talking about a report of the Tax Court in this case. The legislative history of that provision shows Congress had the broadest possible intent to make all practices in the Tax Court completely transparent. All steps in the adjudication were supposed to be --
 Well, would that include -- if a Tax Court judge had a law clerk, would it include law clerk memos to the judge?
 We -- we don't take that position. It refers to reports of judges, and this is a report of a trial judge who heard the witnesses. The report is presumed correct under rule 183. It's the only independent evaluation of witness credibility --
 Now, why -- why do you say that?
 -- and the only judge --
 Would you elaborate for this reason? Because the briefs and you again today keep talking about that first document. You use the word report.
 Yes.
 Well, to me that's the whole conclusion of the case. I'm prepared to assume, at least for the moment, if you can convince me that that's the report they're talking about, you'd win. But that isn't what the Government says. The Government says that's a piece of paper, preliminary. We -- like my draft. I write drafts all the time. So -- so do trial judges. And he goes and brings the draft to the other two judges and says, let's sit down and talk about it. And they sit down and talk about it, and he changes his mind and writes a different document. And that different document, of course, is totally public. The whole opinion of the Tax Court. There is that document.
 There is only one rule 183 report. Under the rule, it's the report the trial judge prepares and submits to the chief judge at the completion of the trial, which contains his independent credibility findings.
 How do we know that? Now -- now, what is the answer specifically in the statute? Let's call it document 1 and document 2. And it really didn't help me that much in the briefs to see document 1 continuously labeled with the word report when I thought that's the key question. Is it? Is it that report they're referring to? So now, go ahead.
 Under rule 183(b) there is a report denominated as such. There's no question here it was submitted to the court. If you look at page 114a of the Kanter appendix, it says that the special trial judge submitted a report, as required by rule 183(b). And this case was then referred to Judge Dawson. He had no involvement with the case until this report was given to him.
 Which --
 I'm sorry.
 Which -- which brief --
 Oh. It's the petition for cert. The Kanter petition.
 At least --
 What -- what page did you say?
 What -- what page?
 114a, 114a. And throughout --
 Mr. Shapiro, why don't you simply read the text of 183(b) --
 Yes.
 -- which is in the Government's brief at 4a? It says, special trial judge's report. It is the only report to which the Tax Court rules refer.
 That's correct, Your Honor. And it's --
 And -- and if in fact --
 -- it is presumed correct.
 -- you rely on the rule, do we even have to resolve the issue of meaning of report in the statute? Can't we simply, from your position, rely on the rule and say you've got to follow your own rules?
 Absolutely. This is a report that must be submitted. It is presumed correct under this rule. It's an independent evaluation of credibility from the only judge who heard the witnesses, and of course, it's part of the record. And it doesn't --
 So you've really got three arguments. You've got the rule. You've got the statute, and you have due process.
 And it doesn't make the slightest difference that the superior judge caused the subordinate judge to say, I have changed my mind at a later stage in the proceeding, because it is the original report that is presumed correct under the rules.
 All right. Now, what -- what was the page? Please. You're going quite -- and I want to -- because Justice Ginsburg referred to a statement in the Government's brief that you said yes --
 No, not the Government's brief. The Tax Court rules.
 That's -- that's appendix 4a.
 4a of the Government's brief.
 It's the rule.
 Yes, it's the rule itself, 183(b). And it makes it clear that there must be a report filed with the chief judge. The docket here says that that was done.
 Can you make the argument that -- maybe you can't -- that the special trial judge can go to the Tax Court judge, with the permission of the chief judge, and say, now, here's what -- kind of what I'm thinking? It's not my report, but here's what I'm thinking. And then the -- the Tax Court judge says, well, why don't you have some more findings on X and Y and Z? He says, okay, and then he goes back. Can you make the argument that that first document is not the report?
 The first -- there is only one --
 Well, I guess another way of saying it is, do the rules permit any consultation before the report is submitted? I -- I guess that's my question.
 The rules are silent on that, but Judge Dawson has no involvement in the case until the report is submitted. Then the case is assigned to Judge Dawson, and then he is supposed to review it under a presumptive correctness standard. So it would be surprising if there were consultation of that sort. But what we contend is if there is consultation behind the scenes about credibility determinations, then it is critically important that the report be submitted and made part of the record and not concealed, and that the deferential standard of review be --
 Would -- would that problem be overcome if the special trial judge simply -- if his -- the proceedings before him were simply videotaped and then the reviewing judge, Judge Dawson in this case, could look at the trial proceedings and would have as much of a notion of the credibility of the witnesses as the special tax judge?
 I suppose that's a possibility, but in Anderson, the Court said absent some procedure like that, the trial judge is uniquely situated to evaluate demeanor and tone of voice, and because of that, great deference has to be given to the independent evaluation of the trial judge. Maybe in a -- in the future the Tax Court would want to use a procedure like that to mitigate the Raddatz problem that they now have.
 In which case, they -- they might well revise the language of their rule.
 Yes, they -- they might, and --
 Which currently requires that the finding of facts of the trial judge be presumed to be correct.
 That's correct, and after all, we should remember that the Government was supposed to present clear and convincing evidence of fraud in this case, and if there was a flip-flop of this sort going on behind the scenes, leaving no trace in the record, what could be more important to the reviewing court than to know what had occurred at the first stage and the second stage here? If the trial judge found no underpayment and no fraud, which we have reason to believe he did -- three Tax Court judges stated that to us -- if that was -- that was his finding and he found our witnesses to be credible, then an unexplained overturning of that credibility determination with no trace in the record would surely be a candidate for reversal on appeal.
 Let -- let me ask this question, if I may. Suppose the -- a special trial judge hears the witnesses, makes a report. It's assigned by the chief judge to a Tax Court judge, and the Tax Court judge looks it over it and says, you know, before I -- before I really spend a lot of time on this, you really didn't explore these three problems. Would you please do it over again? Is he permitted to do that or is that a violation of the rule that he shall presume the report to be correct?
 Well, we haven't challenged the conversations as such. We think it is -- it is suspect, however. Under Raddatz, if somebody who has not heard the witnesses is telling somebody who has heard the witnesses, I don't agree or I think you may be wrong in your credibility determination, I'd like you to reconsider that, that's a serious Raddatz problem. And the only cure for that is to make the first report part of the record.
 I'm asking if it's a violation of -- of the rule.
 The --
 Because the -- the rule says a special report shall be presumed to be correct.
 Yes.
 And if there's this initial review, he says, you know, I think it's really pretty incomplete until you do X, Y, Z, please do it over again, is that a violation of the rule?
 Well, I think the rule is silent on that, but the spirit of the rule, frankly, is that the STJ does his job. He completes his report. He submits it, and the reviewing judge examines it under a presumed-correct standard in -- in the same orderly fashion that ordinarily occurs when there is an initial judgment from a -- from a trial judge about credibility with deferential review that comes later. But the rule doesn't tell us much about these consultations, and we do submit that if -- if they do take place, as the Government suggests, there's importuning and changing of minds going on through consultations, do this on record. Turn square corners because it would be quite important to the appellate court to know if there was a good reason for the overturning of these credibility determinations. And we -- we've seen that kind of review in the Stone case in the D.C. Circuit, which is very similar to this case. Factually the cases are quite similar. And the reviewing court, Judge Williams, found clear error based on what the rule 183 report stated about witness credibility. There was an elaborate explanation why particular witnesses were credible and incredible, and the court could use that to evaluate the judgment of the Tax Court.
 Of course, what you're asking us to do would -- would just solve your problem in this case, and -- and in the future, I suppose they could revise rule 183 as simply not to require a report. There -- there's nothing in the statute that requires this report, is there?
 Well, that's true. They could cease using the STJ's, but --
 Well, they could -- they could use them, but just say, instead of filing a report, he'll consult with the -- with the deciding judge.
 I -- I suppose that could happen. If there is -- if there is no report written, we couldn't contend it has to be disclosed under these statutes, and that -- that might be. But it -- there could be a Raddatz issue in that scenario that you present, Justice Scalia. If one judge heard the witnesses and the other judge didn't hear the witnesses and -- and the -- the superior judge --
 Well, they confer with each other. Maybe, maybe.
 But it -- it would be -- it would be quite strange to have credibility determinations made by a judge who had never heard from any of the witnesses.
 What happens in cases in agencies, you know, where -- where -- suppose the agency itself or a member thereof is going to make a decision, and there might be other members who would hear the witnesses. And I was thinking of that analogy. It's possible. It happens in the Federal Communications Commission where the staff, you know, consults back and forth in ratemaking cases.
 Oh, yes.
 It's hard to find precisely the analogy, but it seems likely.
 The -- the closest analogy in this Court's decisions is the Morgan II decision.
 Yes, which gives and takes away.
 Now, Morgan II is really on point because there, a subordinate official drafted up findings, proposed findings, didn't serve them on the parties, but did give them to the decision-maker, the agency. And this Court held that was a violation of due process.
 You have to have an opportunity to refute the information that's going to --
 Absolutely.
 Yes.
 And -- and every administrative body that we know of in the Federal courts and in the State system too -- Chief Judge Vanderbilt pointed that out in the Mazza case. Every State in the Union requires disclosure of these administrative law decisions to the parties.
 If you analogize the STJ to the administrative ALJ. But you might also analogize him to a member of the agency itself, and if you make that analogy, it doesn't become so far-fetched, particularly when you look at Morgan as also not allowing you to probe at what's going on.
 Yes. Well, we -- we've avoided suggesting that any depositions should be taken of -- of judicial personnel here. That's not our view. Our view is simply that the report that was prepared -- it was prepared -- should be made part of the record by virtue of two statutes. There is an appellate review statute, Justice O'Connor, that states quite expressly that Congress expected review to take place here just as it does in the district court, to the same degree, to the same extent, and in the same manner. And in the district court, if an adjunct judge makes a finding of fact, whether it's a master or a magistrate or bankruptcy judge, that is always disclosed to the parties.
 Mr. Shapiro, is there any evidence in this record that the special trial judge in fact changed his report beyond the hearsay affidavit?
 We don't know what is contained in that first report. We have heard from three of the judges, including the chief judge of the STJ's, that -- that what happened was that Judge Dawson rewrote the credibility findings. Now, we won't know until we see this. That could be wrong. But -- but it should be part of the record for the court of appeals.
 Mr. Shapiro, on credibility, which you have been emphasizing, are you overstating the case for it? Because credibility is more than just observing the witnesses' demeanor. I mean, Judge Dawson could have said, yes, they -- these witnesses might have looked honest to the special trial judge, but considering this documentary evidence in the record, it's clear to me that what the witness said on the stand was a lie.
 Well, you'll see in perhaps a dozen situations, he says, I simply don't believe that witness, none of whom he heard. And this is a case where credibility was key. Was there a bribery scheme of the kind that the IRS claimed? Every witness who testified said no, it didn't exist. These are simple investments with the proceeds being paid to the corporations, and yet, the Government's theory was there is some nefarious bribery scheme that every witness denied. And there is no documentary evidence of that. The evidence of the proceeds flowing to these corporations was simply the result of their investing money in real estate deals. And so credibility was the key to this whole case. And the -- the Government, I don't think, can be serious when it tells this Court that this first report is some confidential document, that it's privileged internal deliberative material. For 40 years, the -- the Tax Court made these reports available to the public. It -- they were routinely served on the parties. For 40 years there was no suggestion --
 Would -- would you comment on that? I -- I understood from the brief there was a suggestion that if you prevail, we're going to have a huge volume of -- of printed material that we're not troubled with now.
 Oh, yes. That's a post hoc rationale. There was no such explanation when this rule was changed, and there's not a bit of work or a bit of expense resulting from our position. We simply ask for a copy of a report that exists. They can serve it on us electronically. It won't cost them a cent. We're making a very modest request under these statutes and under the Due Process Clause. And there was no explanation --
 Well, now, wait. Under the Due Process Clause, I assume you would be asking for more than just access to the report. You -- if -- if you're really relying on Morgan II, he who hears must decide, I think you would be saying that after reading the report, you should have the opportunity to argue to the -- to Dawson here, to -- to the Tax Court judge that the report should not be adopted.
 Well, we defer to --
 Isn't that part of your due process case?
 It -- it really is not. We're asking --
 You think it satisfies due process just to show you the report, and then --
 To give -- and make it part of the appellate record. We're not asking for any remand to the Tax Court. If the Tax Court doesn't --
 Well, then -- then you're not relying on Morgan II.
 Well, we -- we just rely on that as an example of the need to disclose this at an appropriate juncture.
 There wasn't a need to disclose the point that Morgan II made. It was he who hears must decide.
 Well, in Morgan II, the -- the point was that any -- any proposed findings that are drafted up have to be shared with the parties. Now, there they had to be shared with the parties at the administrative level. We're not going that far. If the Tax Court tells us that they don't want to have that layer of review within the Tax Court, they don't want to receive our comments on the initial report, that's fine with us. We want it to be made part of the appellate record so that the judges who are interested in this and believe it will shed a strong light on the issue of clear and convincing evidence can have this be part of the record. And already the Fifth Circuit has overturned the finding of fraud in this very same case.
 Do -- do I understand that you would be satisfied if the Court simply looked to -- what is it -- 7482(a)(1), the appellate review section, which says that the Tax Court decisions shall be reviewed in the same manner and to the same extent as district court decisions? And that --
 Yes. We'd be satisfied because that is a sufficient basis to say the record has to include the rule 183 report. And it is not up to the trial court to tell the appellate court what's in the record on appeal. It's up to the appellate court to -- to determine what goes into that -- that record. This -- the case in the Second Circuit on that is IBM v. United States where the Second Circuit analyzed rule 10(a) and said it is not the province of the trial court to dictate to the reviewing court what is in that record. And this Court in --
 And where is it? It's -- it is specified someplace, but when you review a district court decision in -- in a court of appeals, the -- certainly the magistrate's report would be included, but there's someplace where it lists the contents, some rule that lists --
 Oh, yes. It's rule 10(a) and it's -- it's very general. It says that all the original papers in the trial court come before the appellate court, and an original report is an original document submitted in the trial court. And this Court confronted that question in Universal Camera 50 years ago, and the Government made the same arguments then that it's making now and it lost 7 to 2 in that case. It -- it said that the report --
 Institutional memory. Isn't that -- that's a good institutional memory --
 It goes back. (Laughter.)
 The same argument was made that the report is an irrelevance. It's just an aid to the decision-maker, and the decision-maker can do what it wants and has ultimate judgmental power. So there's no need to include that report in the record, and no weight should be given to it. This Court said, we will not adopt an exclusionary rule for the administrative law judge's report. And this is an a fortiori case because this report is presumed correct. In Universal Camera, there was no presumption of correctness at all. So that -- that case, you know, goes further than -- than what the Court has to do here. And the Government's argument that -- that somehow this is --
 That -- that was decided under the APA, wasn't it? I mean, that was an APA case, which this isn't.
 Well, yes, that's true. But, you know, the Court reached out to the APA for guidance in construing the labor laws. The labor laws were silent on this issue, but under the APA, the Court said the general policy is to disclose these reports and we are going to say that that is applicable to the NLRB. Now, the Government says all of this changes the course because the judge changed his mind, but you know, there are so many opinions and orders and reports in the Federal judicial system where a mind is changed and an opinion is suppressed or -- or vacated or replaced and that first opinion is still part of the record. It's a fallacy to say it's not part of the record just because it's been abandoned. For example, if I seek summary judgment in the district court and it's denied and then I ask for reconsideration and it's granted, the opinion has been abandoned, but it's still part of the record. And if I -- if an appeal is taken, it's going to be exhibit A in any appeal, and it may result in a reversal. Same thing when a case goes en banc. The panel opinion is vacated, but then when -- when cert is granted, the argument before this Court may convince this Court that the panel was right. Even though it's been abandoned, it's still very important. Or if a jury verdict is set aside -- the -- the district court says, judgment as a matter of law -- on appeal, the jury -- jury verdict may get sustained. So it's just a logical fallacy to say that because somebody has changed his mind, if that's what happened here, that -- that the first report drops out of the record.
 Would the -- the Tax Court rule -- now, this 183(c) -- says -- it describes the special trial judge's report, which is submitted to the chief judge, and then the chief judge assigns a Tax Court judge, and then it says that -- that the Tax Court judge may modify it, modify the special trial judge's report, or may reject it in whole or in part. Does the Tax Court ever modify a special trial judge's report? Does it ever reject it in whole or in part?
 Oh, yes, and -- and the remarkable thing is that every time it does that, it recites, we hereby adopt the findings and opinions of the trial judge. Now, in the old days, that was not a problem.
 But that's one thing that they can do. They can adopt it, but my question is, do they always adopt and never use -- never use the term modify or reject?
 Oh, no. They -- they do modify and reject. It's just it's hard to determine, when they are doing that. In the old days --
 They -- they never say so in their opinion.
 They don't --
 They always say that they adopt the trial judge's report. Don't they?
 Yes. That's entirely correct. And now, in the old days, before they amended the rule, you could compare the two and see what was changed, but now you can't. You can't tell what has been changed. And in this instance, we believe there's been a complete rewrite of that first report, and the appellate courts can't tell what's going on. Was there a reason for doing this? Was deference given? Was some other agenda at work in this decision? No one can tell because it is all off the record.
 What -- what is -- can I ask you a really esoteric administrative law question, which I have never been able to figure out? It's probably relevant, but I -- this is an agency. That's what -- my great tax professor, Ernie Brown, used to say there is no Tax Court. He says, the Board of Tax Appeals shall be known as the Tax Court. What he meant by that is it's not -- it isn't the Tax Court, just known as. So -- so this is an agency, an administrative agency. So I look to the APA for guidance, and the APA, when you look at the section, says this initial decision can be made by a 556-qualified person. Now, a 556-qualified person can include the agency itself or a member of the agency or an ALJ. Then when you to look at what happens in 557, after that presiding employee makes an initial decision, it says you have to give a chance to the party to respond to the initial decision, which you like, in the case where the presiding employee -- presiding person is a subordinate employee. And so, that's what I was just checking here. And so -- so what's supposed to happen where the presiding person under 556 for that initial or tentative decision is not a subordinate employee, but rather, quote, one or more members of the body which comprise the agency? I've never run into that before. Maybe you haven't. Maybe they didn't mean anything by it, but maybe they did.
 Well, I -- I haven't either. But the judge here certainly was subordinate and --
 He was a subordinate employee?
 Yes, he was.
 Rather than a member -- is -- is -- if he's a subordinate employee, that's easy. Then the case is easy I think.
 He -- he is a subordinate because as the Government keeps telling us, the Tax Court judge is the only official spokesman for the court. They get to make the final judgment. And the Tax Court judge reviews what the STJ has done.
 These -- these --
 But you're -- you're not asserting that the APA governs this.
 Oh --
 No. I'm just looking --
 Isn't there an express exception for -- for --
 Yes, and this a court. This is an Article I court, this Court has held. And Congress has created very specific appellate review procedures for this court.
 The -- the special trial judge has no tenure, does she?
 That's correct. He -- those judges could be terminated at will, including because there is not sufficient work for the judge. They can be terminated on that basis. And that, we think, colors the analysis here for the reasons Judge Cudahy gave. This is not an independent judge. When he is persuaded by his superior to change his mind, it's obvious that he -- in our view, that he's going to be heavily influenced by that. It's a serious Raddatz problem. The only cure is to make this part of the record and to enforce the rule 183 presumption of correctness, which creates a clear error standard of review. I see my time has run out. May I reserve the rest for --
 Yes, you may, of course. Mr. Hungar.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The central flaw in petitioners' case is that both of the trial court judges responsible for evaluating the evidence in the record reached the same conclusion regarding all of the factual issues.
 Mr. Hungar, before you proceed to your legal argument, I was very curious why the Government is defending this practice because the Government, after all, is on the other side of every case. And aren't there situations where it might be that the special trial judge would call a credibility question in the Government's favor and then the Government loses the case before the Tax Court judge and might like to know, before it goes to the court of appeals, how solid the credibility findings were? I mean, I -- I -- the Government being a party to all these proceedings, why is it satisfied with not knowing what the report of the special tax judge -- special trial judge was?
 Justice Ginsburg, we do know what the report of the special trial judge was. It is in the record. Judge Couvillion's name is on his report.
 No, it is not the report. It is called an opinion. It isn't even called the report, and if you will read 183(b), that describes the report. Does anything else describe the report? And what is this report? There is a report. It is submitted to the chief judge. What would you call that?
 The report is the -- contains the recommended findings of fact and opinion, analysis of the law and application of the law to the fact, of the special trial judge. The report is the findings of fact plus, quote, the opinion.
 Now, what is the 183(b) report?
 Well --
 There --
 The -- under rule 183(b), the -- the special trial judge submits his report to the chief judge. It is then referred to a Tax Court judge.
 So that report, the special trial judge's report, is a document prepared by the special trial judge which he gives to the chief judge.
 Correct. But the important thing to understand, Your Honor, is that nothing in the rule precludes, during the course of the deliberative process that then follows, the special trial judge from concluding that he has made a mistake, that he no longer agrees with the -- the stated findings of fact in that -- in that original report, from withdrawing and submitting a corrected report.
 But that's not the way the rule reads. The rule reads, as I understand it, under (c) that the court itself may accept, reject, or modify. It doesn't say anything about the special trial judge reconsidering and rewriting his report.
 It doesn't preclude it either, Your Honor. There's a longstanding practice --
 Yes, it does because it -- it goes on to say that due regard shall be given to the circumstance that the special trial judge had the opportunity to evaluate and the findings of fact recommended by the special trial judge shall be presumed to be correct. But if those findings of fact are simply the same findings of fact that he agrees with the rest of the -- the panel on, it just makes no sense at all.
 The Tax Court judge cannot report in -- in the opinion that is issued by the Tax Court, he cannot say I'm adopting the opinion and findings of the special trial judge if the -- if the Tax Court judge does not agree with those and the -- and the special trial judge adheres to his original decision. The only way it is possible for there to be a change is for the special trial judge himself to determine, in the exercise of his responsibility as a judicial officer, that he made a mistake.
 What report goes to the chief judge?
 Originally the original report goes to the chief judge.
 That's a report. Is that not a report?
 It is a report, Your Honor.
 Why doesn't that -- why isn't that required to be -- to be made public?
 Because if -- because the -- because the Tax Court has determined that it will not be made public, that it is part of internal deliberation.
 It's a report. The statute says that the reports have to be made public.
 No, Your Honor.
 That is a report.
 No, Your Honor.
 And it goes to the --
 No, Your Honor.
 No?
 With respect, the tax -- the -- the statute says a report of the Tax Court must be made public. A -- a report --
 Well, but the rule -- the rule says that the first report, the document 1, has to be given deference. Whether it's presumed to be correct.
 Well, Justice Kennedy, if I may, I'd like first to finish my response to Justice Scalia.
 Sure.
 The statutes -- the -- the disclosure requirement applies only to reports of the Tax Court. It is perfectly clear that a report, the original report, or any report of a special trial judge is not and cannot be the report of the Tax Court unless it is first adopted and approved by a Tax Court judge, and then goes through the next step of -- of being submitted --
 Well, it's -- it's very hard to understand how appellate review can function if that first report of the special trial judge is never disclosed. I just don't see how the appellate review can function properly.
 And how do we know that it was -- that it was presumed to be correct under the rule?
 Yes. How does the appellate court know whether deference, as required by the rules, was given unless the appellate court can see it? It's such a strange procedure. Why, in answer to Justice Ginsburg, does the government take the view it does? Wouldn't you like to see it if it went against you?
 We submit, Your Honor, that there is no evidentiary or probative value in an initial conclusion that the -- that the person who reached that conclusion has abandoned, has concluded was wrong. Special Trial Judge --
 Well, the rule --
 -- Couvillion rejected --
 -- the rule -- the rule 183 does provide for a certain degree of deference to be given to those findings of the special trial judge.
 To the recommended findings of the special trial judge. And I submit that if the special trial judge has concluded that his initial recommendations were mistaken because, based upon further consideration as a judicial officer in the exercise of his obligations, he has realized he made a mistake, I submit it would be bizarre to require a Tax Court judge to give some sort of -- of deference to --
 Mr. Hungar, do you --
 -- abandoned findings.
 Do you see somewhat of a problem, that we are not dealing here with the relationship between peers? Judge Dawson is appointed, what, for a 15-year term. The special trial judge is appointed by the Tax Court and his job is at the Tax Court's grace. And if you have compared in your brief that relationship to, say, a discussion among colleagues, I think it's worlds different.
 Justice Ginsburg, Judge Dawson actually is a senior judge who was recalled. So he doesn't have the 15-year term protection. But it's true that special trial judges are -- are appointed by the chief judge, not by the Tax Court judges, but by the chief judge, so that Judge Dawson wasn't, in a sense, his -- his appointing, employing official. But more to the point, special --
 He has had a special -- a -- a long term and he is well-known and respected as a Tax Court judge who was appointed, as all other members of the court were appointed.
 Well, Judge Couvillion has been a special trial judge, I think, for nearly 20 years. But the point is special trial judges are bound by the code of conduct. The Tax Court has adopted for both Tax Court judges and special trial judges the same code of conduct that applies to Federal judges under Article III, which --
 It seems to me --
 -- obligates independent decision-making.
 It seems to me that it's very much like, if you have to compare it with something, the relationship between a magistrate and a Federal district court judge. The magistrate also hears testimony, makes a report, findings, and a recommendation. What's the difference between those two?
 Well, one difference is that the district court judges, as I understand it, appoint the magistrate, not the chief judge. But a more significant difference is that the statute and rules applicable to magistrates require disclosure of their reports and do not treat them as part of the internal deliberative process. The Tax Court has determined that it is inefficient to have disclosure of the original report, then have exceptions and have that whole process followed that they used to follow. They have determined that they will treat the Tax Court -- excuse me -- the special trial judge's report --
 So where does it say that? Where does it say that?
 They're not requiring the -- this case doesn't involve the question of whether they can make objections to the finding in -- in the special report. It's just whether it's disclosed.
 Yes, Your Honor. But the -- but the Tax Court has determined not to disclose it.
 No, I understand. But your argument about how it would make the proceeding more cumbersome, it seems to me, is -- is misplaced.
 Well, it certainly would be more cumbersome if they followed the procedure that they used to follow, which we submit, although the record is -- they did not specifically state --
 But they're not asking for that. Am -- am I wrong on --
 Yes, that's true, Your Honor. What they're asking for here, what they say they want is merely disclosure of the original report.
 And it's a particularly strong argument in a case -- in several of the issues. I remember Judge Fromm's opinion turned on the credibility of oral testimony, and in one case, Judge Fromm found the -- the judge here made an erroneous ruling on credibility on one issue, if I remember correctly. And it seems to me that's a case in which it would be particularly relevant to know the reasons pro and con on why credibility determinations were made by the person who heard the witnesses.
 But the person who heard the witnesses is Special Trial Judge Couvillion.
 Has been convinced that he was wrong.
 Yes.
 And the question is, well, what was his -- what was the basis for his original position when you're evaluating whether you've got a valid argument to make on appeal?
 Under that rationale, Justice Stevens, every time a district court judge changes his mind, after giving further thought to a case --
 No, no, no.
 -- before he issues his final opinion --
 Only if he is required by a rule to make certain findings and to deliver a completed report to someone else.
 Well, again, the -- the rule does not preclude the practice. It is a common practice --
 It doesn't forbid it. You're right. It doesn't forbid it in so many words. But I just wonder, does it comport with your normal notions of a fair way to conduct a fair hearing, letting the parties know what the basis for decision was and who thought what about the witnesses and so forth?
 Absolutely, Your Honor. If the -- in a -- when a -- when a court has a collegial deliberative process involving more than one person that is involved in the decision-making -- certainly this is an unusual process in that -- and there is no identical analog, but we see no due process problem.
 No. But I don't see what is consistent with your notion of a deliberative process as producing the report and the presumption of correctness in the rule. The rule presumes that some original document, which you are treating as provisional, enjoys a presumption of correctness, and I don't see the consistency between provisionality and deliberate character on the one hand and presumption on the other.
 If I may, Your Honor, the rule does not state that the, quote, original report shall receive a presumption of correctness. It doesn't even say that -- that any report shall receive a presumption of correctness. It says the findings of fact recommended by the special trial judge.
 And aren't those findings of fact the findings of fact that are delivered to the chief judge in the report that is made to the chief judge before it is even assigned to a Tax Court judge?
 Not if -- not if the tax -- if the special trial judge has abandoned those recommendations, withdrawn those recommendations, and replaced them.
 But he hasn't abandoned them at the point that he delivers them to the chief judge, and if that's what this is referring to, then the presumption of the -- of -- of correctness necessarily has to apply to whatever the document is that's delivered to the chief judge.
 Well, it applies to the report, but I submit that if the special trial judge withdraws in order to correct an error in the report, what he submits as the corrected report is then the, quote, report.
 You're -- you're --
 Why isn't that explained in the rules, if that's the process?
 -- have a condition subsequent. It seems to me that you're saying, Mr. Hungar, that the last sentence of 183 is unenforceable.
 The -- the credibility -- the due regard and presumption of --
 The presumption.
 Well, it's important to understand also that, in fact, it would violate the Internal Revenue Code. This rule must be construed to be consistent with the Internal Revenue Code. The Internal Revenue Code makes very clear, and this Court held in Freytag, that the Tax Court judge, not the special trial judge, is the decision-maker, the only finder of fact in these kinds of cases under subsection (b)(4) of the statute. This Court so held in Freytag and the -- and the statute makes that very clear. So it would violate the statute to construe this, as petitioners do, to require some sort of deferential clear error review.
 So you're saying the rule itself in that respect is invalid?
 If construed as petitioners would have it, yes.
 Well, how else could you possibly construe it? There's no presumption operating at all on your reading.
 In the tax context, Your Honor, the -- there is a presumption of correctness that attaches to assessments and deficiency notices issued by --
 No, but you're saying there is -- there is no presumption of correctness that can operate with respect to the report that goes first to the chief judge because, I understood you to say, to do that would violate the Internal Revenue Code provision that the fact-finder and the only fact-finder is the Tax Court judge. And therefore, I think the implication of what you're saying is that the rule on its face is invalid.
 Your Honor, presumption of correctness does not necessarily equate with clear error, deferential review. That's my point.
 I'm -- I'm not even getting to whatever the standard of review may be. I presume the word presumption means something other than it's there unless you want to change it later after the person who employs you objects to it. It's got to mean something more than that.
 What the presumption of correctness means in the tax context, with respect to deficiency determinations and the like, is that the burden of going forward is on the party seeking to change what -- what -- the determination that is presumed correct.
 But there's no party who is seeking to change at this point because the parties don't know what's in it. They're not going forward. This is, as you point out, an internal process that is going on here. So that definition can't apply.
 No, Your Honor. If -- there -- there are two processes that go on. The Tax Court judge, quite appropriately, we -- we assume and have -- have no reason to disagree, confers with, discusses with the special trial judge. If -- if in the course of that discussion, one or both of them come to the conclusion that something is wrong in the original report and if the special trial judge agrees, the special trial judge has the option of withdrawing his original report, submitting a corrected report, and having the presumption of correctness, whatever it means, apply to his corrected report. If -- if --
 In -- in that discussion, does the Tax Court judge have to give great weight to the findings of fact of the -- of the special judge?
 No, Your Honor, not great weight because, again, that would violate the statute.
 Any weight?
 He is to give due -- the due regard provision we think is essentially precatory, as the -- as the Seventh Circuit said. It reminds the -- the Tax Court judge that he should not lightly set aside the credibility determinations. But again, that's not what happened here.
 So I -- I think your -- I think your answer then is not that this is invalid. It is simply unenforceable. It is precatory language, looks okay, but there's no way to police it.
 It's certainly not enforceable in an appellate court. That's correct.
 Judicially it cannot be enforced.
 That's correct, because otherwise it would violate the statute if it imposed some meaningful limitation. But again, it's important to understand here the Tax Court judge did not exercise his authority in this case to reverse or set aside the special trial judge's findings. He could have done so --
 Do they -- do they ever? I mean, this -- this says, this decision -- it's labeled -- the -- the court agrees with and adopts the opinion of the special trial judge. Are there Tax Court cases where the Tax Court says, instead of that, the court modifies the decision of the special trial judge or the court rejects, in whole or in part, the report of the special trial judge?
 We cite --
 Do Tax Court opinions come out that way?
 We cite in footnote 4 a small number of cases from prior to the last rule change in which that occurred. In addition, there are at least a couple of cases since the rule change in which the Tax Court judge rejected parts of the opinion, but not the findings. We're not aware of any cases in which the Tax Court judge has rejected the findings, but there are other cases -- Little against Commissioner, 103 T.C. 285; Walker against Commissioner, 101 T.C. 537 -- in which the Tax Court judge expressed a disagreement with a portion of the opinion of the special trial judge and then proceeded to decide the case in the manner he or she thought --
 Because if one were just to rule this -- read this rule straight: first, the report that goes to the chief judge, and then it says that the Tax Court judge may modify it, reject it in whole -- adopt, modify, or reject in whole or in part. You would expect, if we were having truth in labeling, that whenever, with consultation, without, there's a difference between the two documents, the Tax Court judge, in combination with the special trial judge or without, would say, action on the report -- action on the report, which is the special trial judge's report, is it is modified or it is rejected or it is rejected in part. I mean --
 Well, again, that assumes that the -- that the -- the rule compels the interpretation that the special trial judge is prohibited from withdrawing, correcting, and resubmitting his report. I submit it does not compel that interpretation, and the Tax Court --
 The rule -- the rule doesn't say anything about this consultation that you've described. And if that's the Tax Court's procedure, why isn't it laid out in the rules so everyone can see it instead of being deceived by reading here is the special trial judge's report, and now what the Tax Court will do is either adopt, modify, or reject in whole or in part?
 Well, I don't think it -- I mean, I don't think it's -- it's deceitful, the -- the possibility that a court --
 Misleading. Because when I just read this rule cold, that's what I assumed, that we have the initial report and then it goes to the Tax Court judge, and that judge does something with it, and that something may be adopt, it may be modify, it may be reject in whole or in part.
 Your Honor, when the Tax Court adopted its present procedures in 1984, it -- it certainly did not do so in as artful a manner as it could have. But the question is whether it violates the statute or due process for it to do what it has done. Let me just -- we've been spending most of our time talking about this issue of whether the Tax Court -- the special trial judge is permitted to change his report under rule 183. That's not even one of the questions in the questions presented. The only rule 183 question in the questions presented is whether the rule requires clear error review. We submit the answer to that is no because it would violate the Internal Revenue Code. So this -- this question about whether the report permits -- whether the rule permits the report to be changed isn't even one of the questions presented. The courts of appeals upheld the judgment on the premise that it was permissible for the Tax Court judge and the trial -- the special trial judge to engage in the deliberative process and for the special trial judge to revise his findings as he did --
 I don't think there's any -- any question they can change the report, but the one -- the one -- I'd like to ask you a question as a matter of information. The first sentence of 183(c) refers to the possibility that the judge to whom the case is assigned may direct the filing of additional briefs to receive further evidence and oral argument. Does it ever happen that before the judge to whom it's assigned decides whether or not to go along with the recommended findings, that he will direct oral argument? Does that ever happen?
 I don't know the answer to that, Your Honor. I'm not aware of that, but --
 Because if he did, it would seem almost necessary for him to disclose to the parties what the report they're arguing about would say.
 Again, I -- this is a holdover from the prior version of the rule in which the exceptions process was followed, and again, it may be that had the Tax Court given it further consideration, they might have viewed that unnecessary. But we're not aware of that happening.
 But it certainly seems to contemplate deliberation by the judge to whom the case is assigned about whether or not to accept the report and deliberation which might be informed from input -- input from the parties. That's a fair reading of the rule, I think.
 If --
 Maybe it's not practiced.
 -- if the Tax Court judge so determines, yes. The rule certainly allows that, but it doesn't obviously require that.
 And if he did then ask for further briefings, do you think that there would then have been a requirement to disclose the report?
 Well, presumably it would be a waste of everyone's time unless he -- I don't know that he would have to disclose the report, but he would need to direct their attention to the issue he would like them to brief.
 It seems to me that the author of this subsection (c) must have contemplated the possibility of disclosure of the report.
 Well, again, Your Honor, this language was adopted at a time when they followed the exception --
 When they followed a different procedure, and the question is to how much -- how much did they intend the -- to change that prior procedure.
 Well, we know that the Tax Court has interpreted its rule to permit precisely the practice it followed here because it said so. And it would be quite extraordinary, we submit, for this Court to reverse the Tax Court, which is surely entitled to considerable deference in interpreting its own rules, since, after all, the Tax Court has exclusive statutory authority to promulgate its own rules, and particularly with respect to this issue about whether the special trial judge can change his report, since that was not even one of the questions presented. If I may turn to -- back to the statutory question. Section 7461 requires disclosure of reports of the Tax Court. The special trial judge report is not the report of the Tax Court. Indeed, even a Tax Court judge's opinion and report does not become the report of the Tax Court.
 Does the statute you just quoted prohibit the disclosure of other reports if we call this first draft something other than a report?
 The statute doesn't --
 In other words, would -- would the rule go further than the statute?
 The statute does not prohibit the disclosure of other reports, but the rule clearly does not require the disclosure of reports. The Tax Court in 1984 amended the rule to make perfectly clear that -- that initial reports of special trial judges are not to be disclosed. The Tax Court said in its orders in this case the reason for that is that those are now internal deliberative processes. The Tax Court has made clear that its rules permit exactly what it's doing here.
 Mr. Hungar, you started to say that -- that even the opinion of a -- of a Tax Court judge is not a report of the Tax Court.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 How does that work?
 Page 2a of the appendix to the gray brief, at the bottom of the page, section 7460(b) provides that the report of the division -- and the Tax Court is now and has for many years been divided into one-judge divisions. They used to sit en banc or --
 I was -- I was going to ask you what -- what 7461 referred to when it says the Tax Court and its divisions.
 Yes.
 It also is referred to there.
 For a brief period of time, they sat in -- in panels.
 I see.
 But they -- the -- the press of work force them to -- to divide into one-judge divisions.
 So it's a single judge is a division of the Tax Court.
 Yes, that's correct.
 And the publicity of proceedings does say -- it does say that all reports of the Tax Court --
 Yes, Your Honor.
 And all evidence received by the Tax Court and its divisions, meaning its single judges. Well, what happens with -- with a single judge's opinion?
 He -- he prepares it and submits it to the chief judge under rule -- under statute -- under the statute 7460(b) where it says the report of the division shall become the report of the Tax Court within 30 days after such report by the division, unless the chief judge directs it to be reviewed by the full court. So -- so even a Tax Court judge's opinion is not the report of the Tax Court. Surely the report of the special trial judge is not either.
 It's like an en banc. I -- I have written decisions for a panel in my years on the court of appeals, and there's been an en banc and my opinion gets vacated. It's no longer counts for anything. And isn't that exactly what the Tax Court is? They have the --
 No, Your Honor. The -- the opinion is not made public. In fact, the statute precludes it from being made -- made a part of the record. The last sentence of that same section 7460(b) at the top of page 3a, it says the report of a division shall not be a part of the record in any case in which the chief judge directs that such report shall be reviewed by the Tax Court. And that's a very important point. Congress has mandated by statute essentially the same procedure that the Tax Court follows here.
 Oh, no. No, no, no. How often, when there is a decision reviewed by the court, so that the initial judge's decision is changed, does that judge dissent, so all the world knows what that judge's initial position was?
 The -- the Tax Court judge certainly has the authority to dissent, just as a special trial judge has the authority and, indeed, the obligation under the code of conduct to refuse to put his name on a -- on a report if he doesn't agree with it. If he doesn't agree with the Tax Court judge's view, he has the obligation, the ethical obligation -- and we presume he follows it -- to say I don't agree. This is my report. If you --
 Then he -- then he can publish his -- he can publish his dissent, just as a Tax Court judge can?
 No, but he can preclude the Tax Court judge from doing what the Tax Court judge did in this case, which is simply adopting his report. If the -- if the special trial judge refuses to change his report --
 But then we still won't know what his report is. Yes, he can say, I won't sign this. Tax Court says, fine. This rule says I can reject your findings in whole or in part. I don't need your name on this decision of the Tax Court.
 Justice Ginsburg, if -- if that were the case here, obviously our arguments would be more difficult. But that is not what happened here. If -- if --
 I'm asking you just as the -- the judge who disagrees with the -- the full court can publish his dissent, can the special trial judge who disagrees with the Tax Court judge publish his dissent?
 In the -- the one case involving a change in the opinion, where the Tax Court judge said, I don't adopt a portion of the opinion of the special trial judge, there was no published opinion of the special trial judge. So I don't believe there's a procedure for the dissent. But the point is the court of appeals --
 Has there ever been? Has there ever been?
 A published dissent by a special trial judge? Not that I'm aware of. But the point is the court of --
 And how -- how often does the -- is there a dissent when there's -- when there's a full court review decision?
 Well, there's often a dissent. It's -- it's hard to know from the standpoint of a researcher when -- when it is that the judge who heard the evidence and tried the case is the one who's dissenting, unless they happen to say it in their opinion, because again, there's no original opinion issued by the Tax Court judge who first heard the case. That's kept confidential by statute, which again is an important point. Congress has mandated confidentiality of the initial reports prepared even by Tax Court judges, and it has given the Tax Court plenary authority to promulgate rules governing special trial judges. It is hardly surprising, let alone impermissible under the statute or Due Process Clause, for the Tax Court to follow a similar process for special trial judges.
 Except that the -- the relationship between the -- the one judge and the full Tax Court is a relationship basically of people who are in the same boat with respect to what they know about or can know about law and what they can know about the evidence and the facts of the case; whereas the relationship between the special trial judge and the judge to whom it is assigned is -- is quite different because only one of them has heard evidence and only one of them is the source of conclusion about fact.
 No, Your Honor. It's identical. The -- the full Tax Court --
 It certainly is not identical in -- in the sense that the -- the Tax Court judge then goes and listens to evidence. He doesn't. That's the whole point.
 Well, neither does the full Tax Court when it --
 Neither does the full Tax Court, but if the full Tax Court is disagreeing with one judge, the one judge and the full Tax Court are in the same boat. They have access to the same material. Their limits are exactly the same in each case. That is not true in the relationship between the single Tax Court judge and the special Tax Court judge. The special Tax Court judge is the only one who has heard evidence and can find facts based upon the evidence that he heard.
 No, Your Honor. The -- the tax -- the full Tax Court doesn't go back and -- and hold a new trial, just like the individual Tax Court judges --
 I -- I am quite aware of that. That's not -- that's not the point. I'm -- I'm saying that you cannot draw an analogy between one judge and full Tax Court and use that as an analogy to legitimize the relationship between one judge and a trial master. They are in different positions. They are not in parallel positions.
 Well, then if -- if I understand the point you're making, it's a point of the -- the -- it's the hierarchy issue, if that's -- if that's the point you're making.
 It's the knowledge issue. The special Tax Court judge heard somebody.
 So did the Tax Court judge --
 Nobody on the Tax Court did.
 No, Your Honor. That's incorrect.
 In other words, they're -- they're sitting hearing witnesses? They are -- they are redoing the trial? Surely not.
 Your Honor, in a review -- if a Tax Court judge -- most Tax Court cases are tried by Tax Court judges. Tax Court judges are trial judges, and if a Tax Court judge tries a case --
 But we are talking about situations in which the trial judge is the special judge.
 Well, I'm talking about the full Tax Court, Your Honor. If the full Tax Court reviews an individual Tax Court judge's decision, the Tax Court judge has presided over the trial, heard the evidence, just like the special trial judge here, and then the full Tax Court judge reviews it. That's exactly what happened in the Estate of Varian case, which is in our briefs, out of the Ninth Circuit. The parties complained that they wanted access to the original judge's report because he had been reversed -- been reversed by the full court after trial on an -- on an evidentiary issue, and the Ninth Circuit said no.
 Mr. Hungar, I think we understand your answer.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Shapiro, you have about 4 minutes left.
 The question came up whether rule 183 forbids disclosure of this report. The answer is it does not forbid disclosure of the report. It is silent on the point. But the press release the Tax Court issued in 1983, coming from the chief judge of the court, said that this simply meant that it would not automatically be disclosed.
 Why does 7461 require its -- its disclosure? Because it does say that the -- it's only the decision of the Tax Court.
 Well --
 That reports of the Tax Court that have to be disclosed.
 Our view is that of -- of the Tax Court means any report emanating from the Tax Court. That's the literal meaning of that language. It doesn't mean final.
 Well, that -- that would mean that -- that you would have to make public the -- the reports of a regular Tax Court judge in cases that then go on to the full court. And that's not done, is it?
 There's an exception for the en banc situation because legal issues are addressed en banc, not the factual issues. And there's an opportunity to dissent.
 Well, but it doesn't matter. It would still be a report of the Tax Court if you don't take that language literally. If you say any report coming out of the institution is a report of the Tax Court, you would have to make public the reports of the individual Tax Court judges, which is not done.
 Oh, we say there's a special statute dealing with the en banc situation that -- that governs in that situation. And that the publicity --
 Why is that? What -- what statute is that?
 That -- that's the en banc provision that counsel referred to that said that when the case is heard en banc, the trial -- the -- the single judge's report is not made part of the record. Congress' assumption there was that there would be a new -- new report issued. People would be able to dissent if they disagreed. And this process focuses on legal issues. There is no presumption of correctness.
 That's not a -- that's not a de novo -- they can rehear matters de novo on the en banc Tax Court, can they not? That's a de novo hearing.
 Yes, but it addresses legal issues. It's not a device to second guess factual determinations, and there's a special statute that deals with that, which does not apply to this STJ situation, where there's a presumption of correctness applicable to what the trial judge does. And there is the general disclosure statute that applies there.
 I don't know if I'm getting -- so that's his basic point. The rule doesn't require the disclosure because they've interpreted it differently within their -- within their discretion. Statute doesn't require it and the Constitution doesn't require it. We have to go to the Constitution, I don't see exactly the implications. So I'm nervous. And now, the reports -- he says, go read 7460(b). That's what they're talking about. And then -- and again, I don't know what I'm getting into once I read it more broadly than that. And what about all evidence received by the Tax Court, including a transcript. Of course, this isn't evidence but neither is a transcript. And -- and so maybe that word evidence can be read more broadly, given the fact that it's to include a transcript of the stenographic report.
 I think you're right, and --
 You think I'm right just suddenly for the for the first time? You have thought of this?
 Well, I -- I think that the intent of this provision -- and I know Your Honor consults the legislative history. The intent was to make all of the steps in the adjudicative process transparent, including the evidence, including the -- the stenographer's report, and all reports from the Tax Court.
 There's -- there's a very careful use of language. It says all reports of the Tax Court and all evidence received by the Tax Court and its divisions. So it's only the evidence that -- that's received by the individual judges has to be made public, not the reports.
 Well, we believe that the word all is a broad, generic inclusive term that should be applied, as Judge Cudahy stated, to an STJ report that actually has to be submitted to the chief judge and that has legal effect. It's not just a casual document like a law clerk memorandum. It has legally operative effect. Congress' purpose here was very broad, to have transparency, applicable to all the steps along the way in the Tax Court. It was quite clear on that, that there are arbitrary actions at each step of the way. If you look at the Senate report and Congressman LaGuardia's statements, they said secrecy is a vicious practice in this context, and it -- it should be avoided.
 But we -- we don't have to get into any of that if we accept your argument about 7482(a)(1), that is, the record will be in the same manner and to the same extent as decisions of the district court.
 Absolutely, Your Honor. There -- there are three separate bases for ruling in our favor. One is the appellate review statute. The other is the disclosure statute. The third is due process. And due process should inform the construction of these statutes. This Court tries to avoid serious due process issues through its interpretation of legislation. Judge Cudahy suggested that was the right way to decide this case and we agree that it is. We thank the Court.
 Thank you, Mr. Shapiro. The case is submitted.
 We'll now hear argument in Wilkinson against Dotson. Solicitor Cole.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Prisoners typically want two things: first, to improve their conditions while in prison; and second, to get out of prison as quickly as possible. Respondents' claims here are not conditions claims. They do not seek a larger cell or better food while in prison. Rather, their claims are about getting out of prison. Traditional understandings of habeas would suggest that these release-driven claims lie there, not in section 1983, and this Court's decision in Heck confirms that this common sense answer is also the correct answer. In fact, Heck establishes two bars, each of which independently prevent respondents from using section 1983 to pursue their claims here. First, Heck establishes that civil actions under section 1983 cannot be used to collaterally attack State criminal judgments. Before a prisoner can advance a claim under section 1983 that would necessarily imply the invalidity of such a judgment, he must first show that it has been favorably terminated. And Edwards v. Balisok confirms that quasi-judicial administrative decisions regarding the duration of confinement count as criminal judgments for this purpose.
 Well, it isn't just duration of -- of confinement. I mean, in -- in Balisok, what you had was a determination that the confinement would be definitely less as a result of the -- the good time scheme. The -- the gut notion behind Balisok was that what you were attacking would imply that the sentence itself was invalid because the conviction was and so on. We don't have that here. What we have here is a scheme that makes a -- a sentence that is imposed a more definite sentence. We know where in the range it's going to be reconsidered. And however that may be classified, it's not simply a Balisok situation.
 It's arguably different than the good-time credits at issue in Balisok, as -- as Your Honor notes. However, I -- I would suggest that even with respect to good-time credits, often under many State systems, good-time credits have the dual effect of moving up the parole eligibility date, as well as potentially -- and in some States, it doesn't even have an effect on the --
 Right, but that had --
 -- of the sentence.
 -- that had nothing to do with the rationale in Balisok, as I recall it. Isn't that correct?
 Your Honor, the -- the Court -- that's -- that's correct, yes. And I guess what I'd -- I'd say is that what seemed to be driving the Court, though, was still the durational aspect of the sentence; that is, as the Court said in Muhammad, if a claim threatens no consequence for the duration of confinement, then that isn't a -- or that isn't a claim that should be brought in 1983.
 No -- no question. But the durational consequence in those cases was a definite consequence of longer duration, i.e., a sentence in the first place, a sentence not reduced by good time in -- in the second example. Here, there -- there is no such clear consequence. Here, the consequence is that there will simply be a period of time before a sentence already imposed will be reviewed to determine whether, in fact, it will be shortened or allowed to run. And that's different.
 I'm not sure it is, Your Honor. Both of them are going to have definite durational consequences for confinement.
 No -- no question about that. At -- at the level of whether there is a durational consequence, they -- they both have it. I -- I grant you that.
 And, Your Honor, as far back as Preiser, this Court has noted that challenges to duration go to the very heart of habeas corpus. That's --
 The duration of -- of the sentence. And here, there's no implication at all that this sentence is in any way invalid, that the sentence itself or any portion of it is invalid because the parole would be a matter of administrative grace, but it doesn't -- the determination of parole eligibility or parole suitability does not go to the validity of the sentence in any way, shape, or manner. Does it?
 Well, a decision from a Federal court -- and I guess -- I think the answer to Your -- Your Honor's question is yes, it does. And the reason I say that is I think we need to look to the consequences of the Federal court decision that would follow from the claims that -- that the plaintiffs -- or I'm sorry -- the prisoners here are advancing. The State of Ohio has made individualized decisions with respect to each of these respondents that they should not again be considered for release from prison until 2005. The request -- the relief that they're requesting and the claims that they're bringing, if successful, would result in the Federal court undermining that State decision with regard to the length that they should be incarcerated. It goes directly to the -- the --
 It doesn't -- it doesn't shorten the length that they're going to be incarcerated. There -- there is no certainty that -- that if they win this action, they will be incarcerated for a lesser period, is there?
 Absolutely no certainty of that, Your Honor. But there is certainty --
 And -- and there was in the other cases, wasn't there? In Balisok.
 Well, Your Honor, I don't think so. I mean, prisoners could be released in the State of Washington before the terminus of their sentence. They might not -- it isn't as though they had to serve all the way till the end, less whatever good-time credits they had. They could easily be --
 Well, but --
 -- released prior to that time.
 Oh, indeed, but the -- but -- but getting the good-time credits entitled them to be -- be released earlier. They might have been released even earlier still, but their entitlement to be released earlier was a consequence, wasn't it?
 It was, Your Honor.
 And there is no entitlement to be released earlier as a consequence of this.
 We --
 You just get another hearing and maybe you will, maybe you won't.
 That's correct. You'll -- you'll just get another hearing. But an important note on that: you'll get another hearing, and you'll get another hearing sooner than the State has decided that you should get a hearing.
 Well, that's true. So it makes it possible that you'll get released earlier, but -- but there's no assurance you'll -- really, the crucial question for me, I think, is whether -- whether this could have been brought as a habeas action. Could this have been brought as a habeas action?
 Yes, Your Honor, it could have been brought as a habeas action. If you look at the nature of their complaints, they're -- they're clearly in custody. Habeas would require custody and violation of the Constitution of the United States.
 But they're just asking for a new hearing. They're not asking for an earlier release. What's your closest case that -- that would allow a habeas action which does not seek an earlier release but just -- just a hearing?
 I think probably the Garlotte case, Your Honor, in which the Court allowed a habeas challenge where the only result was going to be to advance the date of eligibility for release from prison incarceration.
 No. But it -- No, go on.
 But it -- it doesn't advance the date of eligibility. It advances the date at which the parole board will take another look. The only eligibility is an eligibility to take -- to have another look taken and not an eligibility for release.
 That's true, Your Honor, but these -- under that understanding of eligibility, where eligibility means the first possible release date. But these prisoners are not eligible for release in the sense of it's not going to happen for them unless and until the next release hearing.
 But if they are subject to another look, they are not necessarily then eligible for release. And I think that's the point that we're getting -- let me -- let me ask a -- a sort of complementary question. Is there any reason that these --
 Is this with an I or an E?
 I was hoping for an I, yes.
 With an I or an E?
 With an E. With an E. But if -- if you take my questioning as a compliment with an I, that's perfectly okay too. (Laughter.)
 I'll -- I'll wait and see what the question is --
 Let's see what it is. The -- the question is, could these claims not have been brought in advance of any application to these particular prisoners of the revised -- whatever they were -- the 1998 guidelines? And if the answer is yes, then they could be brought at a time when, I suppose, habeas would -- would not have been a possible remedy. Is -- is -- am I correct on those two points?
 The State concedes that if they had brought this case before a parole hearing at which the guidelines were applied, that it would be a different case, and that 1983 would be a remedy in that -- in that situation.
 Here's -- here's the difficulty that I -- that I have. When I read your brief, I thought, well, he must be right because this is really about custody. It's really about custody. They want to get out eventually. But then when I -- I -- when I went back to Balisok, I thought, oh, here's the problem. The problem is that it's a damage remedy in Balisok. And normally you want the person to go into 1983 to get damages. But he's going to get mixed up. When do you send him to habeas? Well, we don't want to send him to habeas unless it's clear that habeas should have been brought. And so if he's just challenging, for example, introduction of Fourth Amendment violation evidence or something like that, don't got to habeas. Don't go to habeas. You didn't have to go to habeas unless you had to, unless you had -- unless it was necessary to upset the conviction. You see? That's why that language is there. Now, I got that far. Then I said, oh, I see what you do. We should have one rule for damages. Well, that makes sense. But there's no reason not to have a different rule when you have the injunctive action, and there maybe we could follow your rule. But the next thing I come across is a statement that says, no, no, the rule is the same whether you bring a damage action or whether you bring an injunctive or declaratory relief action. And I said, well, why did we write that? You know, we're the ones who caused all this trouble. But the -- the -- well, because we didn't want to make it too complicated and -- and not have all the questions coming, well, what kind of an action is it really, et cetera. Okay. So once I got that far, I said, oh, well, I'm going to have to change something for you to win. Either I have to change the thing that says the damages should be the same as the injunctive, or I have to change something else somewhere along the line, the word necessary. I don't want to change the word necessary. Maybe I could change the other, but why bother really? Because all that's important here is people know which way they should go. Now, that's where I am at the moment, thinking give him his 1983 action. It's simpler. It follows from Balisok. Why not?
 Well, Your Honor, there would be some real consequences that would follow from that.
 That's what I thought.
 The reason that it's important that these cases go to habeas rather than 1983 is because of the State court exhaustion requirement that's attendant with habeas. Parole claims like those advanced here are often, if not always, intricately bound up with State law issues, and the State law is often going to provide much more meaningful relief than the Federal law claims that the prisoners advance.
 Doesn't the Prison Litigation Reform Act require exhaustion even in a 1983 action?
 Yes, but as Your Honor is aware, that's an administrative exhaustion requirement which this Court referred to in Nelson, I believe, as a substantially lower gate than the exhaustion requirement imposed by habeas. Moreover, it's telling --
 Is -- may -- may I just follow up on that question? At the administrative level, cannot these State law policies perfectly well be taken into consideration? In other words, your argument was these things are bound up with State law issues and the best place to have them resolved is -- is in a State forum. They can be resolved in a State administrative forum, can't they?
 They could, Your Honor, but I -- I think the types of legal determinations with respect to legal entitlements and also the court -- we would assume a State court would also consider Federal claims that might be made by the prisoners when they bring their State court claim. Those types of legal claims are better resolved by State courts. They have the expertise to make the -- the determination. And in fact, in Ohio --
 Well, couldn't one say the same thing of prison conditions that you can bring in as a 1983 action? The States know better about how their prisons are operating and what changes would have to be made. So I -- I think that you -- you may be right that the State knows more about how its parole system operates, but so does it know more about how its prison system operates. And that doesn't -- that's not what determines whether you have 1983 or habeas.
 Well, but Congress, with respect to conditions claims -- and if you look at the language of the administrative exhaustion requirement in the PLRA at 42 U.S.C. 1997(e)(a), it says no action shall be brought with respect to prison conditions under 1983 without administrative exhaustion. So even Congress, in thinking about the PLRA and in thinking about requiring administrative exhaustion, understood that 1983 is really about conditions of confinement. 1983 isn't about -- it never has been about -- release. Habeas has traditionally been the relief that people -- or the cause of action that people bring when what they're interested in is relief -- or release from prison. And these claims, no one can dispute, are release-driven claims. They may not ultimately be successful in securing release, but the prisoners here --
 Well, no, I've got that part. But the -- and -- and you're right about that part. But that -- you know, that doesn't get over the -- the hump here I think because of the -- what we've written. The -- I mean, where I'm coming out now, what you've just said, is well, you know, there's going to be exhaustion in both cases. And prison conditions, if we say that habeas doesn't -- that 1983 applies here I think probably -- I can't guarantee it -- but those where prison conditions would then cover it, and then there would be exhaustion, and there -- where it doesn't seem to make difference there. And now I'm back to asking the other half of this, which is, well, all right, suppose I say I see your point, I think you're right. Now, what -- what is your recommendation? What do we change? Do we change the word necessary in Balisok, which I'd be pretty reluctant to do? Or do we drive a wedge between the damage cases and the injunctive/declaratory relief cases?
 I don't think you need to do either, Your Honor. I think if we go back to Heck and look at the language there that talks about necessarily implying the invalidity of a criminal judgment, which is something --
 Oh, well.
 -- respondents concede in their brief, the only question then is does a parole decision count as a, quote, criminal --
 All right. No, but then what you're doing is taking the first half because what you're reading is you're reading that word necessary, whatever those words were in Balisok that we were just talking about, as your case satisfying that condition. And if your case satisfies that condition, then so does the case where a person wants to bring a damage action because of illegally seized evidence at his trial. Doesn't it? I mean, because all -- I mean -- and then we've swept -- then we've done -- we've really moved Balisok from what it was trying to do.
 I don't think that's necessarily right, Your Honor, because the illegally seized evidence at the trial -- I don't know that that would necessarily imply the invalidity of the conviction that resulted from that trial.
 Why is he bringing his damage action? He thinks he's bringing it because what they did at that trial hurt me. Now, how did it hurt me? It hurt me because I went right to prison.
 Right, Your Honor, and that -- that's absolutely correct, but I'm not arguing for, and I want to make it very clear that I'm not arguing for any rule that would turn on the subjective intent of the prisoner in bringing their claim. It turns on the necessary implication of success on that claim, and that's a -- a distinction that the Court made both in Heck and in Balisok. They looked to what's the necessary implication. So we look to the claims here, not why they brought them, but what are the claims. And the claims here, and the particular ones that I would focus on, are the ex post facto claims. If the -- if they have success on their ex post facto claims -- and we don't believe their claims are meritorious, but if they're successful on those claims, there's no way the State's decision can stand. They are entitled to a new hearing at which they would again be considered for parole --
 Yes, but does that mean the -- the judgment -- the order denying release on parole is invalid? There are really two parts to it. One, you -- we're not going to release you. Secondly, your next hearing will be at a later date than you want. Insofar as you challenge the date of the hearing -- the date of the next hearing, does that necessarily imply the invalidity of the entire order denying parole?
 We -- we concede that if there's an ex post facto violation here, these prisoners are entitled to a new parole hearing. And I guess the --
 But they're not entitled to parole.
 Absolutely, Your Honor. Absolutely.
 So that it doesn't totally invalidate the order that is at issue.
 Well, the way that -- that I've been thinking about it is if you put the State parole decision up on the wall and you put the Federal decision up on the wall, one of them has to come down. The Federal decision trumps the State decision. It can --
 Well, it doesn't entirely come down. It just -- half of it comes down.
 No. The whole thing comes down, Your Honor. They're entitled both to an immediate new release hearing and --
 But not for release.
 -- if they're successful on their claims, they're entitled to more frequent release hearings in the future. So the decision, the State's --
 But -- but isn't it true that one aspect of your order that's under attack is they had refused to grant them parole?
 Absolutely.
 And that remains.
 It doesn't, Your Honor. They have to decide that again. That -- that order is void ab initio. It's as though it were never entered. They have to make a new decision about whether or not this person should -- should have parole and that they cannot in any way -- the State cannot rely on the prior decision that they reached on that issue.
 I thought the only relief they were seeking was a more prompt next hearing.
 No, they -- Dotson's complaint, I believe at page 20 of the joint appendix -- he wants to, quote, proceed toward a prompt and immediate parole hearing in accordance with the statutory laws and administrative rules in place when the plaintiff committed his crimes. They want an --
 But aren't -- aren't those claims moot or academic now? Because, as I understand it, he has had another parole hearing. So he's -- with the hearing that he was seeking, he's already had another. So he's not complaining about the absence of a hearing or -- or flaws in the procedure at the hearing. I thought that this case now reduces to a clean question about the retroactive application of the new guidelines.
 Well, it isn't a clean question, Your Honor, because exactly the same error that he alleges infected his first hearing was present at his second hearing. If -- if you look at the materials that they added to their brief at lines 3, 7, and 8 where they have the new parole decision, it's clear that Dotson's 2002 parole decision was predicated on exactly the same guidelines, exactly the same 1998 guidelines that he says violated his rights under the Ex Post Facto Clause. So, in fact, if anything, it's made his situation worse because a Federal decision on his claims now would both necessarily imply the invalidity of his previous hearing and the 2002 hearing, and the 2002 hearing was a release hearing. Unlike the halfway review that occurred earlier, it was a full-fledged release hearing in 2002, at which the parole board decided both that he should not get parole then and that he should not again be considered for parole until 2005.
 Was there -- maybe I'm wrong about this, but I thought there no challenge being made to the 2002 hearing.
 But what Heck makes clear is it doesn't matter what you say you're challenging. What we need to look to is what's the necessary implication of securing success on your claims in Federal court for a State decision. Here, the necessary implication, if they're successful on their ex post facto claims, is going to be that the 2002 decision can't stand, the 1999 decision --
 Why can't it simply be that prospectively for this class of prisoner, the old guidelines will apply, prospectively without undoing anything that's happened in the past?
 I think for the same reason that in Balisok I don't think there could have been a prospective order that said -- said something like the method you have for choosing decision-makers creates fraud, bias, and deceit, on a going-forward basis you must change that method for selecting decision-makers. Saying that you have to change it on a going-forward basis would mean, necessarily imply, that there had been fraud, bias, and deceit by the decision-maker that would mean that --
 I think twice you started something and our questions impeded you. But I think you were equating the parole board's decision to a criminal sentence, and so you -- you were saying just as the -- the Federal authority can't come in and nullify the State criminal sentence, neither can it nullify the parole board determination. And -- and I thought that the comparison between a -- a sentence -- a criminal conviction and sentence and a parole board's discretionary determination -- you seemed to be putting those on the same plane.
 Not exactly on the same plane, Your Honor, but recognizing that this Court in Balisok said that post-judgment administrative decisions regarding the duration of confinement also count as criminal judgments that are protected for purposes of -- of the Heck doctrine. And in Greenholtz, this Court --
 But -- but the -- the generality at which you keep referring to it, with respect to conditions of confinement, is a -- is a higher level of generality than anything that Balisok decided. In Balisok, the particular decision was a decision to revoke an entitlement to be released at whatever the date the good time would give, and -- and that is a much more specific -- I mean, that literally affects an entitlement to be released. It is not merely a decision with respect to length of confinement.
 Well, Your Honor, if this turns on whether or not it's an entitlement, I would agree with you that it seems good-time credits might be different from an entitlement sense than parole. But -- but all the way back, in tracing the cases from Preiser forward, the Court has talked about duration of confinement, and certainly no one can argue that the decision here is going to have dramatic consequences for the duration of these prisoners' confinement.
 We -- we don't know what consequence it will have for the duration of his confinement. All we know is that it will have a consequence in determining the date at which the next look will be taken by the parole board to see whether he then is in a condition to be released. That's all we can tell.
 That's correct, Your Honor, but they're -- they're pressing ex post facto claims. And as this point -- Court pointed out in Garner in 2000, they can maybe bring those claims based on changes in frequency of parole hearings, but they're going to have to show a definite impact on the quantum of punishment that they receive as a result of that change. So if they're going to be successful on their ex post facto claims, they're going to have to show an impact on the duration of their confinement. Either they have no ex post facto claim because there's no durational impact on their --
 Okay. But you're -- you're assuming -- your argument now is assuming that they are going to be successful on this element, that you say they've got to satisfy later.
 Right, but that's the Heck --
 And -- and whether they are or not has nothing to do with -- with Balisok and Heck.
 I -- I disagree, Your Honor, because in Heck and Balisok, the Court said look to what happens if they're successful on their claims. So I'm -- we're -- the State is supposed to hypothesize that somehow they're going to be successful on these claims. We don't agree it's going to happen, but once we hypothesize that they're going to be successful on an ex post facto claim, it means they're going to have to show, have to demonstrate a durational impact on their sentence.
 Sure. It also -- it also means that if -- if -- assuming your argument is sound, if you lose this case, you win the war. (Laughter.)
 At -- at some level, I think there's an -- an inherent and fundamental tension in their position, and -- and the coin could flipped and conversely there's that same tension in ours.
 Are -- are you sure that that's what they have to prove, that -- a durational impact? Wouldn't it be enough to show that they were deprived of an opportunity to have the sentence shorter? Wouldn't -- wouldn't it -- assuming there was an ex post facto violation, wouldn't that be enough of an injury, that they lost an opportunity to have their sentence shortened?
 But, Your Honor, I believe what makes out the ex post facto claim is an increase in the quantum of punishment after they've committed their crimes. So they need to show that as an element. I -- I see -- I'd like to reserve the remainder of my time for rebuttal, if I could.
 You may do so. Mr. Lewis.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case presents a straightforward opportunity to apply the Heck rule. Respondent Johnson's section --
 Can you tell us why -- why is it still live when they -- when they already received a second hearing? Or why is not moot?
 Johnson still has remaining claims for prospective injunctive relief in this case and, as well, declaratory relief. What may be mooted is his claim for retroactive injunctive relief, in other words, a new parole hearing. I think in order for him to pursue that type of a claim, he'd have to go back down to the district court.
 What -- what is --
 Well, put in plain language what it is Johnson is claiming he's entitled to. I don't understand.
 Well, he -- really three different things. He's requesting prospective injunctive relief, fix the due process violations that are going on in Ohio parole proceedings.
 Which is a new -- a new parole hearing. Isn't -- I mean, it -- I --
 How could that be fixed?
 Yes. How -- how can it be fixed except by giving him a new parole hearing?
 Well, he does have a class action. He filed a class action and he's trying to fix the proceeding prospectively. It doesn't necessarily require him to have a new parole hearing. He's still in confinement and will very likely have a new parole hearing, a new parole hearing that he wants the proceedings to be different in. He's not necessarily asking for a new parole hearing. He's saying --
 Why isn't he? If -- if -- what he's saying is the past proceedings were invalid, I want you to do it right in the future.
 Sure. I think that was part of his claim, which might be mooted, but he's also saying in any future --
 No. It -- it isn't mooted because he still got it done wrong. The second hearing was still wrong.
 Well, we don't --
 His claims here -- if his claims here are correct.
 We don't know that for sure, but part of his claim as well is to say in future parole hearings that I'm going to be subjected to, even if you don't give me a new one, in future parole hearings that I'm going to be subjected to, I want these processes fixed to -- to come into compliance with due process. And I think that's separate and apart from --
 You -- you say we don't know whether the -- the new parole hearing he got was still invalid?
 I don't think there's enough in the record to determine that.
 Oh, so we can assume that that was valid. You're -- you're willing to assume that for purposes of this case?
 I am not willing to assume that. I -- I don't think we can say one way or the other.
 Well,
 We can't yet.
 Okay, fine.
 We may intend to.
 Then we take it as valid. Then we take it as valid. That's not a claim you're challenging. But I take it your claim is in the year 2009 he will have another hearing.
 Actually 2005.
 2005? Okay, 2005 he'll have another hearing.
 Absolutely.
 And in the year 2005, I want not to have the -- what are they called? The 1998 guidelines. I don't want my 1998 guidelines applied in the 2005 hearing because you have some theory, maybe good, maybe bad, but it's a theory that that would violate the Constitution of the United States.
 That's correct.
 So you're saying he's going to have this. I want an injunction or declaratory relief they can't do it.
 That's right, and as well, he says I want to be heard at this next parole hearing. Now, that was -- part of his due process allegations in this case were that he -- he wasn't even allowed to meaningfully participate in --
 And he's saying it violates the Constitution in two respects: one, they won't listen to me; and two, they apply the 1998 guidelines.
 That's essentially it.
 That's it. Okay. We're talking now about this 2005 hearing and he wants new procedures, and the question is, is this 1983 or is it habeas?
 That's -- that's correct.
 Okay.
 And -- and it is section 1983 because it doesn't violate the Heck rule. This --
 And what -- what is your -- what is Johnson's mootness argument?
 Well, to the extent in his complaint he was seeking a new parole hearing as a result of the challenge to the '99 decision, that's probably mooted because he has received this 2001 hearing and we just don't know enough about it to know whether he's going to challenge it or not. He'd have to amend his complaint in the district court.
 Could -- is it possible that both Dotson and Johnson could get new hearings by -- filing habeas --
 I don't think so.
 -- petition?
 I don't think so. I don't think that Johnson has a Federal habeas remedy here because the Federal habeas statute is a challenge to the legality of custody, the legality of confinement, and that's not anything that he's challenging in this case.
 What would you do if there was an allegation of a serious procedural flaw in a past hearing? The parole commission was -- was drunk or they read the wrong file or something, and it was just a challenge to the invalidity of the past hearing. Would that be 1983 or habeas?
 I think that's a closer call, but I think it --
 That's why asked you. Why isn't it -- (Laughter.)
 Right. And -- and I -- I think it is still section 1983 if certain things are present. That is, is he going to necessarily imply the invalidity of the duration of his sentence by winning his case? And if that's meets the Heck rule and if he isn't, then I think he can proceed in section 1983.
 Do we have any case in which what was being -- what was sought to be challenged in a habeas action was not the duration of the sentence, but the procedure by which the duration of the sentence was determined?
 I don't --
 Is there any -- why -- why shouldn't that be a habeas action? Why shouldn't 1983 be limited to prison conditions, which is what we've always -- and referred to it as -- as that in the past?
 Well, I think in the hypothetical that you've presented, Justice Scalia, if the prisoner wins the case in that particular case, then his sentence is invalidated, and I think that's the important critical factor here.
 No, no, no, not necessarily. He -- he's just saying the parole hearing I got lacked due process safeguards. Had I had those safeguards, I might -- I might -- have been given a shorter sentence. I can't prove I would have. I'm not challenging the sentence really, but I want a new hearing. I didn't get due process. Give me a proper hearing because I might get out earlier. Why shouldn't that come under habeas?
 Because it's not a challenge to the legality of the confinement.
 My law clerk found two cases which we've just looked at briefly. One is called Wilwerding v. Swenson and the other Johnson v. Avery where she says that in those two cases people were using habeas to challenge prison conditions even. Now, so there are -- there are two cases that, if she's right -- and she's usually right -- that -- that -- where habeas was used to challenge prison conditions. So I've thought, well, if they can use it, they certainly could use it here.
 Well, and I -- I think point with -- with both of those decisions is that the Heck rule did not come into play because the prisoners must have gone through and exhausted their State court remedies, and so there wasn't an issue as to whether they must bring their claim in habeas.
 No. It was a different issue, but it said habeas could be brought.
 Sure. I think the Court in -- in that particular case --
 So habeas could be brought here?
 I don't think so.
 Why not?
 I don't think there's a remedy in habeas for the respondent Johnson in this case because the first thing that's going to be asked when he goes to the Federal district court to seek habeas relief is, well, are you challenging the legality of your custody?
 Yes, and they say sure -- sure I am. I'm saying I had terms. You know, I was going to be here under conditions A, B, C, and A, B, C in my opinion mean I will be released sooner, and instead, they gave me D, E, F, and D, E, F means I'm likely to be released later. I can't guarantee it. That's what he'll say. He says I can't guarantee it, but I wouldn't be bringing this case if I didn't think at least it was a shot.
 Right. And -- and -- but he's not necessarily challenging the legality of his custody.
 Well, but -- but that's part of the conclusion that we're going to have to reach to -- to resolve the case. Why isn't he? How is that that much different than if a judge -- let's assume, under a proper sentencing guideline scheme, the judge just uses the wrong guideline. The man is going to go to jail for either 5 or 10 years. We don't know which. But that's -- that's a classic habeas case. Here, he's going to stay in a prison for 5 or 10 years. We don't know which. Why isn't this a classic habeas case?
 Because I think in -- in the first hypothetical, Your Honor, that -- that you gave, the challenge, if successful, would -- would completely invalidate the sentence that he received. They'd have to redo the -- the sentence. And -- and I think that's the critical distinction in this case, is that when Johnson files his complaint, he has a 10- to 30-year sentence by the -- by the State court. If he wins, he still has a 10- to 30-year sentence.
 Well, it wouldn't completely invalidate the sentence. We know that he's still going to be held and he's going to be held in custody. It's a question of how long, which is exactly what this case is.
 But in the hypothetical you propose, Justice Kennedy, the -- the prisoner was actually -- would be actually challenging the sentence he received, and by winning the case, he's going to undo the State court sentence.
 Yes, well, those cases happen to involve -- happen to involve sentences. This case doesn't involve a sentence. It involves an opportunity to have his sentence shortened. And if habeas can be brought for that, we would phrase it differently. We wouldn't say it would have to invalidate the sentence. We would say it would have to invalidate the proceeding that could have shortened his sentence. I grant you we can't use the same language we did in the earlier cases, but if this is properly a habeas action, then we -- we can get some language to make it fit.
 Well, I don't -- I don't think it is properly a habeas action. I think even in the decisions where courts may have heard similar claims in habeas, I think it was a matter of just saying, well, the prisoner is already here. He's already exhausted all of his State court remedies. It doesn't really matter whether it's section 1983 or habeas.
 Suppose we wrote an opinion that said, whatever the reasoning -- I don't know what it would be right now -- that said in the future your client should go ahead in 1983. I'm putting you in a slightly awkward position, so don't answer if you don't want to. But I mean, for the future all these cases will be brought in habeas. Now, suppose that's what the opinion said. We're absolutely making it clear just what the -- would there be any harm done?
 I -- I think there would be.
 Now, what would that harm be?
 I think that by -- by having a rule of that sort, that it would be expanding the jurisdiction of habeas and it would start to swallow up otherwise cognizable section 1983 claims.
 And why would that be bad?
 And why --
 I'm sorry?
 Why would that be bad?
 Well, because the Congress has enacted a statute --
 No, no. But I mean, is -- I'm asking you a practical question as a practicing lawyer. Would it be bad?
 Absolutely it would.
 Because?
 Because there's a statute that allows --
 Well, I mean, leaving aside -- Congress changed the statute. It says absolutely it's going to be habeas. Is there any bad consequence in the law?
 It's going to give States a license to violate civil rights that will otherwise not be protected under the statute.
 We'll catch them in habeas.
 Yes, but the -- the State exhaustion requirements in habeas are much tougher. Of course, the State wants them to have to go through State exhaustion.
 Ah, so it comes down to that.
 That's really the critical --
 You said -- you said a moment ago that it would be expanding habeas, and I'd like you to expand on that. It would be expanding habeas, I am assuming, because in every successful habeas case, the ultimate remedy that the court can order, if the State does not snap to it, is the immediate release of the prisoner. And I take it when you said it would expand habeas, it would expand it because this would not be an immediate release case no matter what. Is that correct?
 That's correct.
 Okay.
 You would basically end up going to a Federal district court seeking habeas relief asking for processes to be changed prospectively.
 And that's why they could not bring habeas in this case because if they won, they still would not have shown anything that entitled to them to get out now or get out now unless the State within 30 days does something. Is -- is that the nub of it?
 That's -- that's really it, Justice Souter.
 Well, I'm -- I'm not sure. It depends how you formulate the order. The -- the judge says, I'm going to order this prisoner released unless, within 6 months, he has a parole hearing under the guidelines I set. That's the way the habeas statute works.
 Well, if that's the relief that the -- the prisoner was seeking, I think that is clearly a habeas claim. But that's not what Johnson is claiming in this case. He's not asking for entitlement to release at all. He's asking for the processes to be changed prospectively for future parole hearings, and he's asking for declaratory relief.
 Regardless of what he's asking for, if he got what he wanted, he still would not be entitled to any immediate release.
 That's absolutely correct.
 He would still have a sentence of X years, and the question is, how often are we going to look at him to decide when, within X years, we may let him out. Is that --
 That's -- that's absolutely it. He cannot -- by winning his case, he's not going to shorten his sentence in any way. And that's -- that's a big distinction from the Balisok case where there was an automatic entitlement to a shorter sentence --
 Well, he might --
 -- for Balisok in that case.
 -- he might shorten the term of his confinement.
 Might but not necessarily. And this Court made very clear most recently in the Nelson decision --
 Well, you could say the same thing when you're challenging the sentence. He might but he might not. We're just -- we're just hearing the case.
 I think a challenge to the sentence necessarily invalidates that sentence if you win. But a challenge to parole is much different because you're not affecting the sentence if you win your case. And the term necessary is completely necessary to the Heck analysis, as this Court made clear most recently in the Nelson case from last term.
 That's the nub of it I guess. The fact that he may be granted parole has no implication for the validity of the sentence.
 That's absolutely right.
 In fact, it assumes the sentence is valid, but that he will probably stay clean if he gets out. That's all it means, isn't it?
 That's really all it means. And this Court last term in Muhammad in -- in footnote 1 made clear that the incarceration that matters for this analysis is the -- in the incarceration of the sentence from the State court. And I think that's -- that's what the Court needs to look at, is what is Johnson's effect on the State court judgment or sentence. What's the necessary implications? Not in this case at all. And really, this case I think has already been decided by Wolff. It's something that the petitioners sort of don't mention too much in their briefs. In Wolff, the prisoners in -- in that case were trying to get their good-time credits back. I think this is an easier case than the Wolff decision. And what the Court did was parse out, okay, you can't get your good-time credits back, but you can seek prospective injunctive relief to fix the processes that are used in connection with depriving prisoners of good-time credits. And that's precisely what Johnson is seeking here. Your Honor, the other thing I wanted to mention was the notion -- Your Honors, the other thing I want to mention was the notion that there's no State review of these decisions. The Prison Litigation Reform Act clearly provides for State administrative review of even challenges to the process. So the -- the State of Ohio could easily set up an appeal process administratively to -- to correct that problem.
 Thank you, Mr. Lewis.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Untereiner, is it?
 Yes, Justice Stevens. Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: I'd like to, first of all, go to the point that Justice Ginsburg raised about the allegations in Mr. Dotson's complaint. This case has -- has become much simpler with respect to Dotson because any claim that he might have had about this 2000 scheduling decision has been mooted. What's really left are claims for future injunctive relief, for prospective relief. These are classic 1983 type cases. Prisoners have been bringing lawsuits since Wolff against McDonnell alleging that parole procedures and other kinds of procedures, disciplinary procedures ought to be reformed and seeking future injunctive relief with respect to those kinds of -- of procedures. In Edwards against Balisok, this Court indicated that ordinarily claims for prospective injunctive relief will not be barred by the Heck doctrine because ordinarily they will not call into question or necessarily imply the invalidity of any previous decision. So to Justice Breyer's question, this would require a change in the law, and it would, I think, fairly substantially cut back on the kinds of suits that have been brought for 30 years under Wolff because in all kinds of suits like this, the State would argue, as the petitioners are arguing today, that there's some prior administrative decision that's called into question by a future claim for injunctive relief with respect to some aspect of the procedures relating to good-time credit revocation or parole or the revocation of probation. So I think this would be a fairly substantial change in the law. A lot of these claims would be barred by Heck. The -- Justice Scalia, you asked a question about the habeas, the scope of habeas relief. And I think it's important to understand that the lower courts have generally held that habeas is not available for these kinds of claims that are prospective only, seeking changes in future procedures. There are some lower court cases that say that where a prisoner seeks release on parole and demands a right or claims a right to release on parole, that might be cognizable in habeas, but the vast weight of authority in the lower courts is that claims that only seek an -- the right to a new parole hearing, the outcome of which is completely discretionary --
 You want a 1983 hearing in which a United States district judge tells the parole commission, now, here are your marching orders for future cases. You have to comply with this rule, that rule, this rule. What is an analog that you can give us where United States courts have done this under 1983? Using an administrative case, if the -- if the agency does it the wrong way, we reverse that decision. It would be like a review of a conviction that's not final. Have we had cases where under 1983 litigants come in and say, now, these agencies are doing it the wrong way? You have to -- can you give me an analog?
 I think there -- there are a fair number of cases in the lower court where -- lower courts where these types of claims for injunctive relief have been brought and the Federal courts have ordered, on a prospective basis, that the States conform to all kinds of -- I mean, Wolff is a case like that I think where the -- the State was required to do certain things in the future. So I think these are ordinary 1983 claims for injunctive relief.
 Is there any significant difference between this case and Wolff? I mean, Wolff was a case of procedural fault supposedly, and if those faults were cured, someone would have a better chance at getting good-time credit. Wasn't that what --
 Yes.
 So it seems to me it's very -- very close to your situation.
 It is very close, Justice Ginsburg. Dotson is essentially making two claims for prospective relief. He is saying that these 1998 parole guidelines effectively rescind his eligibility for parole. At the time of his conviction, he was entitled to parole after serving 15 years. Under these guidelines, he'll have to wait till -- until 32 and a half years have passed before he's eligible for parole. And he's claiming that in -- in his next parole release hearing, which is in June 2005 and beyond, the State is required to apply the old rules to him so that he'll be eligible. So this is very much like what was at issue in Wolff. The second claim he has is that he's entitled to annual parole release hearings in the future. Again, it's a future -- it's a prospective claim only. In the future, he will be entitled to annual parole release hearings, and the new rules say that the State can postpone those hearings for up until 10 years. So on both of those claims, he is seeking changes in the future, and these are classic 1983 type cases that have been brought, as I say, for the last 30 years in the lower courts. Now, the Heck test requires a showing that if he prevails on his section 1983 claims, he would -- that would necessarily imply the invalidity of his underlying conviction or sentence. And I think this case is very different from the Balisok case. There -- there was a colloquy about that earlier. I think that Balisok is clearly distinguishable because the administrative decision there would have had an immediate and direct impact on the duration of the prisoner's sentence by -- by revoking the good-time credits. Whereas, here, the impact is very, very speculative. Justice Souter, you referred earlier to a durational consequence. The durational consequence here is really quite hypothetical and remote. If he prevails on his 1983 claims, all he will be entitled to are future hearings, and since parole is entirely discretionary in Ohio, we can't predict the outcome of those proceedings. He'll also be entitled to -- merely to be considered eligible for parole in the future. So I think that the -- the consequences -- any impact on -- on the duration of his confinement is -- is really quite hypothetical here and it would require an expansion not only of the Heck rule but also of habeas jurisdiction to resolve this case in the State's favor. Unless there are any further questions, we would ask that the Court affirm the Sixth Circuit's unanimous decision in favor of Dotson. All 11 members of that court found that Dotson's claims were not barred by Heck, and this Court should affirm.
 Thank you, counsel. Mr. Cole, you have about 4 and a half minutes left.
 Thank you, Your Honor. A number of points. I wanted to start by responding to Justice Souter's question, which was again asking about this need for entitlement to early release as part of habeas, and would ask the Court to consider the In re Braden case where a prisoner in Alabama was seeking to challenge a detainer that had been issued by Kentucky. And the basis for the challenge to the detainer in habeas was the fact that it was having implications for his parole eligibility in Alabama. So there, there was not going to be necessarily an entitlement to earlier release, but simply a difference in the parole considerations. Second, Justice O'Connor, with respect to your questions about mootness, the only point that I would add is that if this case is moot now, it was moot when the Sixth Circuit decided it as well. So if mootness is the direction we're going, I think there need to be a decision vacating the judgment below --
 Well, what's your position as to whether or not it's moot?
 Your Honor, we don't believe it's moot either, and in -- in fact, for two reasons. First, once again, it's threatening consequences for an existing decision, albeit it not the one that was originally threatened or where invalidity would be implied below, but there is a new one where that would have that consequence. In terms of bad consequences, I think the single biggest bad consequence of directing these prisoners to 1983 rather than habeas is it's going to deprive them of the opportunity for meaningful relief in Ohio's courts. The Layne decision in the last -- decided just 2 years ago, three prisoners brought a declaratory judgment action about the way parole works in Ohio. They were successful and their case resulted in 3,000 prisoners receiving --
 But -- but you raise deprivation of the benefit they would get from the Ohio courts. If they wanted that benefit, they could have brought a 1983 action in State courts. State courts have jurisdiction. So it's a little odd for you to say, oh, they're being deprived of a benefit when they're telling you by this very lawsuit they don't want it.
 That's true, Your Honor. At the same time, this -- bringing this -- this case in 1983 in Federal court means that they're not going to be able to get injunctive relief on State grounds under the Pennhurst doctrine. So they are depriving themselves of a chance to get that type of meaningful relief that Ohio courts are offering and that courts in other States are offering. The other -- the other point I wanted to make is that with respect to Petitioner Johnson's argument, his understanding of sentence, that if it doesn't impact the sentence, it can't be in habeas, would mean that parole revocations can't be in habeas either. A parole -- parole -- when you're on parole, you're still serving part of your sentence, as he understands it, part of the initial term that the court has imposed upon you. Granted, you're not doing it in prison, but a parole revocation wouldn't impact your sentence. It would merely bring you back into prison to serve the remainder of your sentence rather than having you serve it on the street. So I think that understanding of sentence can't make sense for -- for habeas purposes.
 I think sentence means custody. Don't you think it means custody?
 Well, but to the extent we're talking --
 The custody you've been sentenced to?
 But to the extent we're talking about duration of custody or duration of confinement, again, the claims here do have a -- success on the claims here would have a meaningful impact on the duration of confinement. This Court in Muhammad said -- I think this is probably the -- the closest quote on point -- challenges to particulars affecting the duration of confinement are the province of habeas corpus. This is a challenge to a particular, the parole procedures, that's affecting the duration of their confinement. Or at least that's their allegations, and that's what success on their claims is going to mean. And because of those durational consequences, as well as because of the consequences of success on the merits for previous State parole decisions, we believe that those claims are better routed to habeas than to 1983. If there are no further questions.
 I had one further question. Are you asking us to change anything in Wolff against McDonnell, or can we follow that case?
 I think we can follow that case as it's been reinterpreted in Heck. Wolff said that -- well, Heck said that Wolff was about challenges that would not -- and I believe the language is -- necessarily vitiate the underlying decision. So the way Heck understood Wolff was that the procedural challenges there, with regard to the prospective relief they were seeking, were not the type of relief that would necessarily vitiate any decision that had already been made. Here, by contrast, the claims that they're bringing, the ex post facto claims, if they're successful on the merits, would necessarily vitiate the decisions that have gone before. Thank you, Your Honors.
 Thank you, Mr. Cole. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument in Bates against Dow AgroSciences. Mr. Frederick.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Pesticides are economic poisons designed to kill living things. Sometimes they do not work as designed. For more than a century until the 1990's, courts routinely permitted farmers to bring claims against pesticide manufacturers for crop damage caused by pesticides. In enacting amendments to FIFRA in 1972, Congress did not intend to displace those preexisting State law remedies. The farmers here allege claims for defective design, defective manufacturing, fraud, breach of warranty, and failure to warn for a brand new product that severely damaged their peanut crops. I'd like to start with our narrowest theories for reversal and demonstrate for three reasons why those claims survive preemption. The defective design and manufacturing claims challenge the product's composition, not its label. The fraud, warranty, and negligence claims involve general legal duties, not pesticide-specific requirements, and the failure to warn and fraud claims are not different from or in addition to FIFRA requirements. Now, with respect to the first point, Dow concedes at pages 43 and 49 of its brief that defective design and manufacturing claims generally are not preempted. That concession warrants a remand here, as this case was decided before discovery, enable the farmers to develop their claims.
 But couldn't you make every failure to warn claim a defective design claim? That is, they didn't warn about the effects, but those effects would not have been present if the product had been designed to assure that there wouldn't be any adverse effect on the peanut crop.
 Justice Ginsburg, the way the Restatement of Torts and Product Liability in sections 1 and 2 describe, there are basically three theories that products liability claims can proceed on: a defective design, defective manufacturing, and defective warnings. The restatement explains that they are distinct legal theories that go to different problems that the manufacturer has caused with respect to the product. A defective design claim asserts that the composition was inadequate and that a properly designed product could have been put on the market that would not cause the harm.
 Mr. Frederick, on the defective design claim, presumably that's based on a factual theory that Dow could have reasonably designed Strongarm to be safe for growing peanuts in high-acid soil.
 Correct.
 But doesn't that mean your client should have to put forward some evidence establishing a material issue of disputed fact on that point?
 Certainly, but here --
 And it didn't do that.
 Well here, Your Honor, the motion for summary judgment that Dow filed was not based on the merits of the claims. It was based on them being preempted, displaced as a matter of Federal law. They also asserted a limitation of -- of remedy provision. But we never had discovery in this case. The District Court, after finding jurisdiction, considered Dow's motion for summary judgment on preemption and locked us out of the courthouse door before we ever had a chance to prove that a safer design for the product could have been made. And that's where we think the court's decision below was overbroad and should be reversed.
 The -- the problem I have with -- with the Government's case and with the respondent's case is that -- it's really the obverse of what Justice Ginsburg said. Their problem is that they would recast everything as a warning.
 That's absolutely correct.
 Does the restatement have some specific provisions that say no matter how good the warning is, you're still entitled to proceed when there's a -- I don't know -- dangerous product or defective product or something?
 Yes. Restatement sections 1 and 2 address this, and what the restatement says is that if you can show that the product could have been reformulated to be properly designed, then the existence of a warning that might go to certain of its uses would not negate a defective design claim. The Texas Supreme Court --
 Even -- even if the warning specifically covered that design defect?
 That -- that's -- that's correct. And what the restatement --
 So even if this product said, warning: may not be effective in high pH soils, that's not good enough?
 Under the restatement rule, which Texas has adopted in the Uniroyal case, which we've cited in our brief I think at page 47, that is true because the restatement explains that there are certain warnings that could be ignored or not observed or not understood properly and that if it can be proved that a properly designed product would be on the market, there are public policy reasons why that's what we want to encourage manufacturers to do. I mean, under --
 At any cost? I mean, what if it -- you know, yes, I can -- I can sell you stuff that will -- that will work in high pH soil, but it's going to be three times as effective. Do I have to sell it?
 Well, the --
 Can't I just sell it for those people who don't need it for -- for high pH soil at a third the price with a warning that says, hey, by the way, don't use this in high pH soil? It's crazy to say you can't do that.
 Justice Scalia, to answer your question in several ways, that's a jury determination to -- to ascertain the reasonableness of the alternate design that the manufacturer would be asked to -- to do or to market a separate product that was separately designed for high-acid soils.
 But it's never a question of the reasonableness or the adequacy of the warning?
 I don't think it's a question of warning in this sense, Justice Kennedy. If you take their theory, which is that a defective design claim always collapses to a failure to warn, they can put out a defectively designed product that admittedly causes harm, and all they have to do is change the label and say, if used in these particular circumstances, it may cause harm, because that would necessitate a change to the label --
 Oh, not necessarily. It wouldn't be always either way. I would think that if in fact you have a product and the product causes harm in a subset of cases, which you could warn against, then a jury could decide whether the unreasonableness consists of not having designed the super-safe product or the unreasonableness consists of not having had a different label.
 And that -- there are -- that's why the restatement makes clear that there are distinctive theories for defect --
 And you're arguing that in this case you have the first.
 That's correct.
 It seems implausible on -- you know, --
 Well, we have both actually.
 -- because all they'd have to do is don't use it in pH soil.
 No. We have defective warning too, and -- and if I can address that as well. The statute here prohibits in section 136q(1) any false or misleading statement in the label as to any particular. Our position is that the 2000 label said, suitable for peanut-growing areas in all places where peanuts are grown. That was false. Under the statute, that is a misbranding, and that is actionable as -- both as a failure to warn, as a fraud claim, and as a breach of warranty. Now, the Medtronic majority made absolutely clear that that kind of claim is not preempted, and in fact all nine Justices agreed that when the State law claim is parallel to the Federal requirements, the existence of a State law remedy is not an additional requirement.
 So on -- on that aspect of the case, you put in your pleadings that this was a violation of FIFRA.
 We don't necessarily need to say a violation of FIFRA is -- so long as the requirement is the same, although we can certainly --
 Well, that's a -- that's a bit different. You were -- you were asserting a moment ago I thought -- please correct me if I'm wrong -- that this was a violation of FIFRA because it was misbranded.
 I --
 It seems to me that you then have a suit under FIFRA, but I don't think that was the theory of your complaint.
 No. The theory of our complaint was a failure to warn both for negligence and as a defective product.
 But the reason for that, I take it, is that FIFRA does not -- I mean, I think you agree FIFRA does not provide an independent private right of action.
 That's correct.
 So you've got to sue under State law, but you would -- you would kind of have a slam dunk for your position, I suppose, if your pleading said, the failure to warn only to the extent that in fact the -- the warning given in compliance with FIFRA was an inadequate warning. That would -- that would keep you within the -- the -- in effect, the -- the Federal limit, and it would also make clear that you had a State law cause of action, not a Federal cause of action.
 That's correct, and because --
 And -- and that's in effect what you're arguing.
 Yes. And -- and because of the preliminary of this suit, Justice Kennedy, we certainly should have the opportunity to amend our complaint. There are counterclaims that this is done at the motion for declaratory judgment.
 In your view -- in your -- your opinion, if you were to follow that, would EPA -- suppose EPA does the following. EPA looks into this and they publish a reg that says in this case or in this subset of cases, or some kind of description that fits yours, we think that the labeling should be thus and so and we think that State tort suits will interfere with our ability to promote the uniform labeling and therefore they're preempted. Can the EPA do that on your theory?
 Yes, it can and the -- the interesting aspect of this, Justice Breyer, is that of course EPA hasn't done that. EPA has made very clear it never tested for efficacy. It never even gave notice and comment so that --
 Well, EPA has -- has waived efficacy data requirements. Right?
 Yes.
 Now, is it your position that a State can pass a law requiring labels to have efficacy claims?
 They have to do it pursuant to their powers under 136v(a) which is the regulation of sale or use or under 136v(c) which says that when a State designates a particular locality requirement and a special need, it can impose a label -- it can impose requirements that the manufacturer has to comply with. Now, the EPA importantly -- and this is in their regulations at 163.152 -- has specifically said that States have labeling authority. The States can impose labeling requirements. Now, there's no reason why --
 But you're not relying on that in this cause of action.
 No, Justice -- no, Justice O'Connor, except to the extent that if the State can affirmatively do it through a positive regulation, their theory has to be wrong that the -- that any incidental effect that induces a change to label is preempted. That theory has to be wrong, and that's what the Fifth Circuit relied on.
 Well, does -- does FIFRA require the manufacturer to say on the label what the item can be used for?
 Yes, but I want to address --
 So how -- how does an express warranty claim escape preemption --
 As the --
 -- where -- where Dow just says the federally mandated statement is included on my label and it's true?
 A warranty claim, Justice O'Connor, as this Court made clear in the Cipollone case, is not a requirement under State law because it's a voluntary contractual arrangement between the parties. The Court I think has made clear that what has to be ascertained here is does the State cause of action or the State law create a requirement. That's not true in the warranty case because FIFRA doesn't speak to requirements in -- as to warranties. It speaks to requirements in other ways. So what Dow did here with its warranty was completely voluntary, and the fact that it breached that warranty by putting on the market a product that was not suitable for the use in all areas where peanuts are grown is a breach of a warranty that it voluntarily undertook. Breach of that is not a requirement imposed under State law. And that has been, I think, verified by seven Justices of this Court in the -- in the Cipollone case. Now, if I could speak to the fraud claim, it is important to understand that in both Cipollone and in a footnote in Medtronic, the Court made clear that where there are general legal duties that are not observed by the manufacturer that don't go to the specific product itself, those claims are not preempted. Here our assertion is that Dow put on the market a -- a product that was mislabeled and that they went out and told people fraudulently was suitable for their uses. We acted in reliance on that and we suffered damages. Those are general legal duties, not pesticide-specific ones. And the existence of the preemption clause of 136v(b) does not displace us from the opportunity to try to prove to a court that fraud was committed here. Now, if I could briefly address two points. One is that the inducement to change theory should be rejected. That was the basis on which the Fifth Circuit decided this case and it is an overly broad theory for several reasons. First, it's not supported by the text of 136v(b) which says requirements for labeling. It doesn't say requirements that induce a change to the label. And that's how many of the courts have gone off track since the Cipollone decision was announced by this Court. They have read FIFRA as saying just because the word requirements is 136v(b), thereby any State law claim that imposes a requirement that might induce a manufacturer to change the label is thereby preempted. We think that's overly broad because it confers way too much discretion on manufacturers to decide what to put on labels, and they can claim immunity for any overly broad claim of efficacy so long as when they are sued, they can say we're induced to change the label. Because EPA does not evaluate the specific contents with respect to efficacy or the claims that are made on -- on a label, if a manufacturer makes an overly ambitious statement as to efficacy, all the manufacturer has to do under the inducement to change theory is go to court and say we would have to change the label and thereby 136v(b) preempts it. Now, I'd also like to stress that the other side's theory creates a huge regulatory gap. As your question, Justice O'Connor, noted, the EPA does not evaluate efficacy on the front end. And in fact, the history behind these provisions is that EPA understood from the very beginning that common law claims would serve an important incidental regulatory effect. If we could review the history for a moment. Prior to the 1972 changes to FIFRA, for decades farmers had brought claims against manufacturers for design defect, for failure to warn, for the kinds of common law claims that we have asserted in this case. It was so well established by 1972 that there was a huge section in the American Law Reports that annotated all the cases and explained what the common law duties of pesticide manufacturers were. Yet, notwithstanding that, when Congress enacted the 1972 act, despite thousands of pages of hearings, committee reports, legislative debates, there is not one mention of any effort to displace those preexisting common law claims. And when EPA, in discharging its responsibilities under the 1972 act, got overwhelmed by the requirement that it re-register products that were already out on the market, pursuant to the 1972 act's standards, it very promptly went to Congress and said, you should waive efficacy requirements because we simply can't do this. Congress responded, but importantly in the administrations on both sides, EPA has always understood except until just a couple of years ago when the Solicitor General changed the position of the Government, that these kinds of incidental common law suits would have an important regulatory effect. If we could just take the case of DDT. For 30 years, manufacturers were sued for DDT and awarded damages until it became clear that the groundswell over the course of decades that DDT needed to be banned, and it was only at the back end that the expert agency regulators determined that in fact the product needed to be banned, but that was only after a very long history in which common law suits had provided remedies to farmers and others who were harmed by that product. Now, in 1982, the Reagan administration's EPA expanded the efficacy waiver and it included far greater products than had been done in the Carter administration in 1979. And in the Federal Register notice announcing that it was intending to expand that efficacy waiver, the EPA in 1982 said the reason why we think this can be done is because suits can be brought against manufacturers who put on the market ineffective products. We cited that on page 31 of our brief.
 But do you take the position that juries can do what a State regulation cannot do, or are they much -- are they on a par?
 Well, our broadest theory, Justice Kennedy, is that the word requirements in 136v(b) doesn't include common law claims at all.
 Suppose we disagree with that.
 If you disagree with that, then they would have to be the same, and that's why our point about the existence of the parallel requirements is the same. I want to address the point of the discordance between what State juries can decide and what State regulators can decide because Dow and the Government have featured that in their case. The Government in the Medtronic case at page 27 of its amicus brief there said there was no problem to be had with juries rendering supposedly inconsistent decisions so long as they were following one Federal standard. The Federal standard here is clear: falsity. Tell the truth. That's what manufacturers are obliged to do under the statute and under the regulations.
 Well, that's their strong point. So what is the response to that? Because you can easily get two juries in different parts of the country to decide absolutely opposite things as to what the label should say, and in those circumstances, they say, well, they're in an impossible situation and that's why Congress passed this statute, to be sure it would be EPA and not two juries in different places.
 First, the juries -- unlike a -- a declaratory judgment or an injunctive type remedy, Justice Breyer, a jury for a common law damages claim is not saying what affirmatively should be on the labels.
 I'm speaking practically. And I don't have to go into all the argument.
 Sure.
 You know the argument. It's a very familiar argument.
 Sure. The answer is that -- that Congress was prepared to accept a certain level of disuniformity when it enacted 136v because it made very clear in sandwiching the preemption provision of 136b -- surround -- by (a) and (c) that it was prepared to allow States to depart in significant respects from what was nationally uniform. And the way it did so was to say States can regulate sale or use and they can also impose extra requirements for special locations. Now, what Dow did here I think illustrates the way the system is supposed to work, which is that when a problem was identified with their product in the States of Texas, Oklahoma, and New Mexico, within 7 months it petitioned the EPA to append to its national uniform label a supplemental label. And that supplemental label says it is for distribution in those three States only and it provided 10 important changes to the label that it otherwise had as a nationally uniform label. That's how the system is supposed to work. If the incidental regulatory effect of jury verdicts or common law claims induces or causes some kind of change to the label, that can be done without an adverse effect to national uniformity through the supplemental labeling process. And what Dow did here was it has its label and then it attaches the supplemental label that addresses the particular conditions that exist in the State. And the EPA has recognized that as a perfectly appropriate and valid way to address the geographic, environmental, and climatic conditions that exist in the different regions of the country that engage in agriculture. There's nothing that is uncertain about that if you accept the premise of the Government's argument in Medtronic, which is that juries can be properly instructed, if it came to that, so that they could follow the appropriate Federal standard. Now, I would like to turn -- sorry. Did you -- no, go ahead. I would like to turn briefly to the -- the requirements aspect of the case because we do think that, under our broadest theory, this is a different situation than Medtronic and Cipollone, and because of the important statutory indications that are in the provision 136v. Unlike in Medtronic, there is an explicit provision that is a non-preempted provision, and that is different from Medtronic. Where in Medtronic there was a provision that allowed the FDA to impose its own decisions as to requirements and whether or not the States should be displaced, here Congress made the determination in 136v(a) and in (c) that those kinds of requirements can be imposed. They're in addition to what the Federal standard is. That means that you have to look at requirements in a somewhat different way because the States have this authority that they did not have under the Medical Device Amendments. There's a textual indicator under (b) also which refers to (a) in the sense that (b) says such State that shall issue these requirements. Such -- the meaning of it in Webster's means what has been already described -- is in (a), and in (a) the States are authorized to promulgate regulations. So we think that there is a textual basis for distinguishing the word requirements that this Court -- five Justices in this Court in Medtronic said would encompass common law claims. If there are no further questions at this time, I'd like to reserve the balance --
 Let me ask one because I think you'll hear some variation of this, and you have a minute, which is the -- the statute sets up a perfectly good way of keeping this branded stuff off the market. All any complaining farmer has to do is to go to EPA and ask them to pull it, and pulling it is an unbelievable sanction. It's like the atomic bomb on the company. And so that's very strong. And the only thing that leaves out is the possibility of damage remedies, but if you want your damage remedy, just go to EPA and tell them to give it to you because they can write the rule the other way that I was suggesting.
 Well, I don't think that EPA could write a rule requiring damages to be done. It doesn't have the statutory authority --
 They would just say it doesn't preempt.
 Well, there's no indication here that EPA can do that kind of thing. In FIFRA, it certainly doesn't have that kind of provision. I mean, certainly there are different ways that the statute could have been written. That isn't the choice that Congress made. Thank you.
 Mr. Waxman.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: FIFRA's preemption provision, which Congress specifically amended in 1978 to add the title uniformity, preempts by its terms, quote, requirements for labeling different from those required under FIFRA.
 Why -- why doesn't the other amendment limit your argument? Because Congress has also passed an amendment to the effect that unless EPA chooses to get in to the business of -- of passing on efficacy, it -- it need not do so. And in fact we know it is not doing so. Why, therefore, doesn't the uniformity argument go to those subjects that EPA does review for and why doesn't the subject of efficacy, in effect, drop out of -- of the -- the whole preemption claim?
 There are -- there are two fundamental reasons. The first is that it is a principal requirement of FIFRA, and has been since 1972 and remains, that a manufacturer may only sell a registered pesticide with the precise labeling to the word and font size that EPA has approved, and that requirement applies whether the wording relates to human safety, environmental protection, or efficacy. Now, the specific amendment in 1978 was, as Mr. Frederick indicated, represented a representation by EPA to Congress -- and Congress' -- the -- the committee report plainly indicates this -- that the EPA was not saying we are no longer regulating efficacy, we are no longer concerned with efficacy. What they said was because the Department of Agriculture and the extension services and the State universities are all involved in this and, in particular, are involved in the statutory requirement that before a manufacturer can even apply for registration, even submit a registration application, the manufacturer must do extensive, rigorous efficacy testing, which Congress has indicated correctly is very expensive --
 But it's not monitored at all. The -- the manufacturer can say -- make up reports and EPA is never going to look at it.
 If the manufacturer makes up reports, it has committed a felony. EPA can enforce it. It can refer it to the Attorney General. It's just like the --
 But maybe it isn't a labeling violation. I mean, there are claims made here that I have trouble shoehorning into your theory. For instance, why does a claim that Dow negligently failed to field test its product on peanuts on acid soil impose a label requirement?
 Justice --
 I -- I just don't understand that.
 Justice O'Connor, I think -- I will address the negligent testing and, of course, the design defect --
 Yes.
 -- discussion that's figured so prominently in my colleague's argument. It's very, very important to understand that unlike in Sprietsma and Medtronic and so many of the -- and, for that matter, with respect to the preempted claims in Cipollone, the claims that were preempted below, we didn't file a rule 12 motion to dismiss. We couldn't have with respect to at least one of those two claims. We filed a motion for summary judgment that said with respect to -- let me take design defect first. With respect to design defect, it is possible under Texas State law to state a claim for products liability under defective design without impeaching the labeling. And there is a brief filed in this case by Dean Powers, the University of Texas Law School, for the -- the Texas Chemistry Council who's an expert on Texas tort law, and he goes through the Texas torts in detail to show why they are all preempted and all invalid under independent and adequate State grounds. But what we did is we didn't move to dismiss. We filed a motion for summary judgment, and in that motion for summary judgment, we pointed the respondents in this case to this Court's decision in Celotex v. Catrett, and we said, in effect, we know that you can allege a design defect claim without impeaching the labeling, but we think that what you are complaining about does impeach the labeling. Therefore, show us what you have. Now, under rule 56, they had two alternatives. They could have filed an affidavit or a request under rule 56(f), as this Court referenced in Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, and said, hey, we don't know how this was made. We don't know how this was tested. We don't know how this was manufactured. We're entitled to discovery, and district courts recognize that all the time. What they did --
 And they didn't do that?
 They did not do that, and what they did was to submit affidavits and documentary evidence, including expert affidavits.
 Mr. -- Mr. Waxman, you said they didn't file a motion to dismiss. I thought you brought the lawsuit.
 We brought the lawsuit and we --
 But then they couldn't file --
 No, no, no. I said we didn't file a motion to dismiss --
 You didn't file a motion to dismiss your own complaint?
 No, no. Their counterclaims.
 Oh, okay.
 In other words, this wasn't decided -- Mr. Frederick's reply brief talks over and over and over again about how this was decided on the pleadings, and you know, there was no discovery allowed. Under rule 56, they could have asked for discovery when we basically said, okay, let's show our hands. We got two jacks. What do you got? And what their expert said and what their response said was if the 2001 amended label had been on it, we wouldn't have been injured. Now, rule 56(c) says that when you oppose a summary judgment motion with affidavit evidence, the burden is on the adverse -- the adverse party must by affidavits, or otherwise provided in this rule, set forth specific facts showing that there is a genuine issue for trial, and they didn't do that. Now, the classic design defect -- let me -- let me give you an example.
 Well, let's just try to boil it down a little bit for my purposes. Do you concede that there could be a claim based on no testing --
 Well --
 -- that there could be a claim based on design defect, that there could be a claim saying there were off-label oral statements made that amounted to fraud or misleading --
 I'll take them in your precise order.
 Okay.
 Under Texas law -- and the Court of Appeals opinion, the Grinnell opinion cited by the Court of Appeals opinion, says this, as does Dean Powers. Under Texas law, negligent testing is not an independent tort. It is of necessity a subset of inadequate warnings. It is an element of a -- the tort -- the claim of product defect related to warnings. And so it is not possible under Texas law, settled Texas law. Other States are different, but Texas in its sovereign capacity has chosen to make claims of negligent testing an element of the tort of defective product by failure to warn, and that --
 And the way you proceeded in this case, you made it clear that it would be impossible for the Texas court itself to weigh in on this because you jumped the gun. They wanted to proceed in Texas court, and then we would have known what Texas law was on these subjects. You said, no, we want to be in the Federal forum.
 We want -- as the -- as the Fifth Circuit found and the District Court found, we filed a declaratory judgment in Texas after we received their demand letters because we wanted this to be adjudicated in a single forum, which the Texas venue rules would not have allowed, and we -- we actually filed this in Lubbock, Texas, which is the geographic center of where these 29 farmers operate. Now, with respect to defective design, yes, under Texas law if they had a -- they have to allege and they have to prove that there is a safer alternative design for this product, which they never even introduced one quantum of evidence about. But --
 It seems to me you're -- you're arguing the merits of the tort claims rather than the preemption issue.
 Well, what we said was your claims are preempted if they impeach the labeling that we are required by Federal law to use.
 But they now say they don't. They ought to be able to proceed on those claims. What do we do with that?
 Well, what this -- what -- what happens under rule 56 --
 And also the -- also the claims of false, misleading statements outside the label.
 Yes. I'm going to get to the false and misleading statements outside the labeling in a minute, but just to finish the design defect point, they filed a complaint -- a counterclaim which had as a count this was defectively designed. It is possible under Texas law to prove that something is defectively designed. If they had come in and said, but we filed a motion for summary judgment that says here's our evidence and we don't think that you can satisfy -- that you are, in fact, complaining about a defective design --
 But if they did allege a defective design claim under Texas law, would that have been preempted?
 No. If -- if they had said, look, the problem with this, which as footnote 9 of our brief indicates, it's not a --
 It seems to me your argument is not whether there's preemption. It's whether there's a State cause of -- State law cause of action.
 No, no, no. It's -- it's both. With respect to defective design, what we said is, your claim is preempted because you aren't going to go to the jury on defective design without impeaching the label. If we're wrong, prove it in response to our summary judgment submission.
 But you can --
 Is that their burden?
 It is --
 Is that their burden or is your burden to show --
 It is -- it is absolutely their burden in -- as the responding party to a motion for summary judgment, to show that there are material facts that are either in dispute or there are material facts that would allow them to go to the jury.
 But on your theory there is no material fact, it seems to me, because your -- what you say they cannot make good on that claim without impeaching the label.
 And they --
 Every time they sue on the -- on the ground that -- let's say, that -- that the -- the actual use was inconsistent with what the label described, you could say, gee, if their theory is correct, we'd have to change our label to say that what's on the label now is in fact not properly descriptive of the product. So it's not a -- a question of needing more fact. On your theory, whenever they, in effect, sue on the basis of what you say, your response is going to be, as a matter of law, well, if they're correct, we'd have to say something else. That impeaches the label. Therefore, preemption.
 That is exactly right. What they could have done in response to our motion for summary judgment is to say this product assertedly harms -- when it is applied before the seed is planted, will harm the product it is -- the plant that it's supposed to protect if the soil pH is too high. They could have easily have come back and said if they had a -- a design defect claim that didn't impeach the label to say you should have -- there was a way to manufacture this product. You could have it in pellet form rather than in the soluble form or if the problem was the alkalinity of the soil, there is a way to design this so that it is dissolved in a more acidic solution. The classic case, which is referenced in the NRDC brief, which has many, many examples of true design defect claims that don't impeach labels, is a case involving rat poison. It's a case called Banks v. ICI America. It's a Georgia Supreme Court --
 So you quite clearly have both. I understand that. Let me ask you a question about the -- the preemption point because what I think they're saying is go read the red brief, your brief, pages 6 and 7, and there you see a statutory requirement and you see regulatory requirements, regulation. And I think one of their claims is we are arguing that that statutory requirement, without any change in the regulatory, that -- that it was violated. These are false. They're misbranded. So we are not imposing a requirement different from or in addition to the requirement of Federal law. We are enforcing a requirement that is the same as the requirement of Federal law, and if, by the way, the EPA were to think that tort suits in those circumstances in practice are too disuniform, let them promulgate a regulation to that effect. But they haven't. Now, what -- what is the answer to that argument?
 The answer is threefold. Number one, a challenge to a -- the wording of a statement on the label on the grounds that it is false and misleading is -- does impose a requirement different than Federal law, not the requirement that -- that labeling not be false and misleading, but the fundamental requirement that a -- unless and until the EPA says otherwise, the manufacturer can only sell this product with the precise labeling that EPA has approved. And it -- if you look at page 63a --
 Mr. Waxman, do I --
 -- of the joint appendix --
 Mr. Waxman, do I take it from what you have just said that there is no -- even though the statute prohibits misbranding, that there is no way that that can be privately enforced, that misbranding is something strictly for EPA to deal with, that the statute has a prohibition on misbranding? I can see the argument that all we're doing is enforcing the provision that says no misbranding. So is EPA the only the player in the misbranding --
 Insofar as labeling is concerned, the answer is yes, and that's because the statute -- the statute has many, many instances in which it makes it clear that in service of the objective of a nationally uniform label, the expert agency that approves and dictates the language of that label be the one to decide what is or isn't --
 Mr. Waxman --
 Where does it say that?
 -- can I ask you one question here?
 Because you were just going to point out where it says that --
 It goes to your --
 -- which I think is --
 Excuse me.
 I'm sorry.
 Just let me ask this one question. Supposing the label says, this product contains vitamin A. Period. And it doesn't contain vitamin A, and they prove that in court. And you say you would have to change the label. I suggest you could change the product by putting vitamin A in it.
 Well, you can -- you're --
 Why isn't that an answer to the misbranding? You change the product not necessarily the label.
 Because the difference between a -- that would be a -- a manufacturing defect, which are cases that have been decided --
 It would be a false statement in the label. The label happened to be false, a misrepresentation in it.
 If -- if the -- if it contains -- I'm sorry. Was it vitamin A? If it contains vitamin A because that's what the manufacturer intended and that's what the manufacturer produced --
 No. The manufacturer knew it didn't contain it. He falsely put that in the statement --
 Oh, I see. Said that --
 -- and -- and it's -- it's a misbranded, false statement. Now, does he have to change the label or could he change the product?
 Well, I believe that you have -- you would have to -- I mean, would it be efficacious with vitamin A? I don't know, but if it -- if it requires a change in the label, it has to be done by EPA because the manufacturer commits a Federal law violation if it sells the product with any different label. If you -- if I can just direct the Court's attention to --
 No, but I'm suggesting he could sell the product with the same label if he just changed the product to correct the misstatement.
 Well, the test, as the Fifth Circuit stated, Justice Stevens, is whether a judgment against Dow -- I'm quoting. Quote: whether a judgment against Dow would cause it to need to alter the Strongarm label. I'm -- and that's the -- those are -- that's the test that was applied here and is always applied.
 Okay, but why --
 That is, does the State law cause of action -- is it premised on a State law duty that there -- that different labeling be used --
 No, but neither --
 -- that is, a little bit different than what Federal law requires.
 The problem that I think some of -- several of us are having is that both the -- as I understand it, the Fifth Circuit test in your argument draws no distinction between the two following kinds of situations. Situation A: there's something that the manufacturer should have told you, should have put on the label, but the manufacturer didn't. Situation B: the manufacturer puts something on the label which in fact is wrong and in Justice Stevens' example is in fact false and it causes harm. It makes sense, it seems to me, for preemption purposes to say if the person who sues sues simply on the ground that I bought it in reliance on the label, the label was false, I should get damages for -- for whatever harm was caused, that situation should be dealt with for preemption purposes differently from the situation in which the -- the manufacturer made no false statement. He simply should have said more. And if -- if you don't distinguish between those two situations, then the -- the prohibition against mislabeling means absolutely nothing because -- because it can never be enforced, in effect, except with respect to some prospective user. It can never be enforced with respect to the actual user.
 Justice Souter, that is a choice that Congress could have made. It is plainly not a choice that Congress did make because it applied the preemption provision to requirements that are either in addition to or different than. And whether a label is assertedly misleading because it fails to include something on the EPA-approved label or --
 Requirements for labeling or packaging --
 Yes.
 -- that are in addition to or different.
 Yes. I -- I --
 Requirements for labeling or packaging.
 Yes, and -- and if it -- if the --
 Yes, and the argument that's being made is that we ought to -- we ought to read -- we ought to read the limitation, which Justice Scalia has just described, with respect to labeling and packaging, in a relatively narrow way to allow the suit to go forward and, therefore, we ought to make a distinction between the two kinds of situations.
 The allegation in this suit -- the claims in this suit -- and I -- I see that my time has expired.
 Ms. Blatt.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: It would entirely destroy the uniformity contemplated by -- contemplated by the statute if the EPA-approved and mandated label were subject to jury-by-jury invalidation based on a jury's determination of whether a label is false.
 This is a new position for the Government, isn't it?
 Yes, we have --
 You used to take the opposite position.
 That's right.
 And we're dealing here, as -- nobody has mentioned it, but there -- there's a clear statement rule for preemption, isn't there? Doesn't the preemption of -- of traditional State powers have to be clear in the statute?
 We -- we think subsection (b) is unambiguous in preempting any statement.
 It's -- it's ambiguous enough that the Government -- the -- the chief beneficiary of the -- of the supposed preemption didn't see it. It used to come out the other way. How can you possibly say it's clear?
 Well, the agency is allowed to change its position and we realize --
 I understand. It's -- it's welcome to change it, but it -- it's one thing to change it. It's another thing to change it and come in to say that the question is clear.
 Well, we think that -- we realize that our position was inconsistent with not only the Court's decision in Cipollone and in Medtronic that recognizes that requirement extends to common law duties. But more importantly, a system where a jury-by-jury on the same facts could come up with completely different reasons why a label is false --
 So -- so if you have one administration thinking the one thing and the other thinking the other thing, why isn't the answer that the agency can promulgate the reg it wants? And therefore if the reg -- if the agency comes to that conclusion, let them promulgate that reg. And if a different one thinks it can work with the tort suits, let them promulgate that reg.
 Well, unlike Medtronic where preemption occurred by virtue of the FDA's regulation, under FIFRA there's preemption by virtue of the statute itself. And I just want to give one --
 Yes, but why isn't there a big difference, for purposes of your argument, between the Medtronic situation and this one for the simple reason in this case you've got a statute that authorizes EPA to do absolutely nothing on the subject of efficacy? And EPA does nothing on the subject of efficacy.
 Well, that's just not true, with all due respect. I mean, they -- the -- we don't verify the accuracy of the efficacy labeling, but the requirement, both in the preemption provision and in the requirement to use the EPA label, clearly extends to efficacy. And you can have disuniform context whether it's safety or efficacy. Imagine a label that directs a product to be mixed for 20 minutes. One jury could find the label was false because the product should have only been mixed for 10 minutes. Another jury in the same courthouse could find the label was false because the product should have been mixed for at least 30 minutes. And this case is another really good example. Now the petitioners are saying the label says that the soil only should be a 7.2 level. Their expert says --
 Yes, but the remedy to that would not necessarily be to change the label. It might be to change the quality of the product that requires how much time for mixing.
 And we think it's critical that our position is that this statute only operates in the area of labeling, and it preempts only those State labeling requirements --
 What do you say about my vitamin A example?
 I think your vitamin A example is an excellent example of a non-preempted claim. If a manufacturer says that this is a pesticide and he puts Clorox in the bottle, the plaintiff wants to get to the jury on the theory that a reasonable manufacturer would not have used Clorox. He would have used the pesticide. If the argument, on the other hand, is Clorox was fine. I don't have a problem with Clorox, I just wish I would have been given a warning, but that's not the way a plaintiff would frame his complaint. We think it's critical that our theory is if the plaintiff's theory of recovery is necessarily -- necessarily predicated on a requirement that the manufacturer used a label different than the EPA-approved label the Federal law required it use --
 Well, let's -- let's be specific here. If it's a failure to test, if it's a -- a design defect requirement, if it's an off-labeled, false misrepresentation, why are they preempted?
 On the face of the complaint, we agree that they're not preempted. Our only position is by the time it got to summary judgment, the courts decided that they had no evidence on what would have been non-preempted claims. If another farmer wants to bring an expert that says Strongarm can be manufactured --
 But then do you endorse the theory of the Court of Appeals in this case?
 Well, we think the Court of Appeals took it claim by claim and read the affidavit -- or at least the District Court did --
 And you think just mere inducement to change a label is sufficient to create preemption.
 Mere inducement only to the extent that that's a shorthand way of saying the label was -- necessarily had to be required. Let me give you an example.
 If Congress wanted that, surely it could have stated it more clearly than simply saying the State shall not impose or continue in effect any requirements for labeling or packaging. A tort suit because of -- of mislabeling is not a requirement for labeling or packaging.
 If the --
 And if Congress wanted to say that, they could have said it.
 Well, I think they did say if a common law duty is necessarily premised on the requirement that the manufacturer used a different label than Federal law required him to use. In this case, the common law duty of a failure to warn is saying the manufacturer should have put something on --
 You have -- you have that provision which talks about requirements for labeling or packaging in conjunction with another provision that authorizes the State to regulate the sale or use.
 The --
 I mean, you -- you have to make sense of the two.
 Right, and that's --
 And it seems to me that means the State can impose certain requirements upon the seller to the consumer --
 Not on labeling. Justice Scalia, every day --
 Well, every change -- virtually every change -- virtually everyone -- if -- if you believe the respondent's theory, virtually any State regulation of the substance of the sale will require a change in the label.
 That's just not true. Every day States and localities around the country are imposing use restrictions. They tell -- they tell applicators and users when and where to apply the pesticide and what types of --
 Sale -- sale or use is what it says.
 That's right and they --
 Say -- if they regulate the sale or use.
 That's right, and they do that every day without imposing labeling requirements. Imagine -- imagine --
 Give me sale examples.
 They require the manufacturer, in order to sell the product, be registered with the State, and they can impose whatever sale restrictions they want --
 And can they --
 -- that don't go to the labeling.
 Can they do the same thing by -- through jury verdicts?
 Absolutely not. It would be bad enough if a manufacturer had to shop his label around 50 States and had each --
 So now -- so now you say a State can do something by regulation that a jury can't do.
 No. A State absolutely cannot impose labeling restrictions on a manufacturer.
 I'm asking if the -- if juries can do anything that the -- are -- are prohibited under your view from doing anything that the State could do by a State regulation.
 Right. I'm sorry. Right. Under -- it -- the alternative theory would give more power to the jury to impose labeling restrictions than the State, and we don't think the State can do it. And it would be far more pernicious if a label were subject to jury-by-jury invalidation. No one would read the label, much less understand it.
 Ms. Blatt, there's a brief in this case -- there's a brief in this case that just shows hundreds, if not thousands, of crop damage claims. And your theory is that with this ambiguous provision Congress wiped all that out. It's hard to believe.
 No. Congress just wiped out labeling and only those labeling requirements --
 But everything becomes -- but every -- every time -- my crop was stunted. Okay. You have to change the label so you can't bring that suit.
 Justice Ginsburg, it's just not true. The lower courts well understand this distinction, and they -- they let go all the time claims as not preempted that are true manufacturing defect or true design defect claims. This is not a complete immunity. This is a narrowly targeted one as to labeling. There is a famous example of the Benlate --
 He says their claim is -- is very simple. You didn't tell us that using this in our kind of soil would stunt the crop and wouldn't kill the weeds.
 Right.
 But you're saying that kind of claim can't be brought anymore.
 It can be brought if there's State law and evidence to support the State law that doesn't attack the labeling. And our --
 I've described a set of facts which your position I think you have to say affects the label. The -- the farmer says I bought this bottle. It said okay for all peanuts. My crop grew and it was stunted and the weeds stayed alive.
 If they found an expert that said if you had manufactured this differently or if you had designed it differently and there was evidence to support that, our view is that those claims aren't preempted. And the alternative to let juries --
 No. I'm not giving you that case. I'm giving you exactly what happened.
 This case -- they didn't have any evidence other than saying that the label was inaccurate. But the next -- another jury could rely on the respondent's evidence to say the label was inaccurate because it works better on high pH soil, and another jury could say, well, we need a margin of safety and the label should have said 6.8 instead of 7.0, which is what their expert says. And you can have this time and time again with how often the pesticide has to be applied, when it has to be applied. And to -- and the -- the whole point of section 136v(b) was to have reliability --
 Was that happening when EPA took the opposite view? Was there this tremendous disparity with juries going every which way --
 Well, there's -- there's been preemption at least since the late '80's, and I don't know of cases where juries -- or the theory for recovery was invalidating the label. There are lots of cases that are true manufacturing defect claims, and I direct your attention to the Benlate where the manufacturer contaminated his product. If I'm the plaintiff, my theory -- the theory was you mismanufactured this product. A reasonable manufacturer would have taken practices to prevent contamination, and it destroyed a lot of crops and EPA actually took enforcement action against that manufacturer. The rat poisoning example -- a 9-year-old kid died of rat poisoning because it tasted like a candy bar. The theory of recovery was all the manufacturer had to do was put a bittering agent in it that would have made the kid throw up and the rats still would have loved the poisoning. That has nothing to do with the label.
 Thank you, Ms. Blatt. You have about 4 minutes.
 I just have two points to make. With respect to the summary judgment posture of the case, the way this unfolded was that on one day the District Court decided the motion for jurisdiction, that it had jurisdiction. On the very next day, Dow rushed into court with its motion for summary judgment. And what Mr. Waxman cites as the Celotex invocation merely says that on -- on this point it is neither unfair nor premature to require defendants to produce evidence in support of their claims now as the Celotex trilogy requires. I'm reading from their motion for summary judgment. That was filed before the counterclaims. The only thing that they knew about was the deceptive trade practices notice letter that the farmers had filed pursuant to State law. So they didn't know what our claims were, and they were requiring or saying that the District Court could throw us out of court without giving us any opportunity to file counterclaims, much less try to develop evidence that would prove them. Now, with respect to the disuniformity point, when Congress amended the statute in 1988 to add the word uniformity, it said in that public law that it was a technical amendment. We don't know why Congress put the word uniformity in. The legislative history is barren. It just says this is a technical amendment. It didn't change the substantive provisions that empowered States to impose regulations that would have the effect of disuniformity. Now, at the end of the day, we've got claims that have been brought historically since the late 19th century. Until EPA had a sudden change of heart, there were decades in which juries made these decisions with respect to these kinds of products, and those preemption decisions really didn't take hold until after this Court announced Cipollone in 1992. And it was only at that point that the courts began to have preemption, but for the previous 2 decades, juries routinely decided these kinds of cases. The sky did not fall. EPA didn't come in and say there's labeling disuniformity as a result of this. There simply were no problems. But what did happen was that the farmers who used products were able to get compensation when pesticides damaged their crops. Thank you.
 The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument next in No. 03-407, John F. Kowalski v. John C. Tesmer. Mr. Casey.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: In this facial challenge to the Michigan statute, court of appeals rulings that these lawyers have third party standing and that their potential clients have a constitutional right to appointed counsel in discretionary appeals are both wrong. First, with respect to the standing argument, in our brief we argue that the respondent attorneys could not meet any of the criteria for standing. This morning I'd like to focus on the element of prudential standing that considers whether there is a hindrance to the ability of a third party to protect his own -- to protect his own interest.
 -- there is an injury in fact. These lawyers claim that if the State were compensating for this service and they're on the list to be appointed, they would have more money in their pockets. You're not -- you're not challenging that there is an injury in fact.
 Yes. In our -- in our brief we have challenged that. The -- the requirement is that there be an injury in fact, a concrete and particularized actual or imminent injury in fact.
 But you -- you said now you were going on to the prudential factors, and so I asked were you recognizing that there was an injury in fact, and you said no. And -- and why not? Because it seems so obvious that they would get appointments if the system were --
 I take it you're reserving it for -- in your -- in your brief.
 I -- I am not waiving the argument. I -- I would like to rest on the brief. But I -- in answer to your question, we believe yes, there is a likelihood that these lawyers on the list for appointed counsel will some day -- if they stay on the list and a case comes up in that county, there is a likelihood that there will be a case. We submit, however, that on these facts in this facial challenge, we don't know how many lawyers are on the list for appointments in Saginaw County. We don't know how many appeals of this nature come up. So it may be many years before the situation arises. This is not a concrete and particularized actual or imminent injury in fact, and we've argued that in the brief. At -- at best, if there is an injury in fact and if there is -- another factor is the close relationship to the third party. We believe those are weak at best, and we've argued in our brief that they don't exist. I think it is most clear, however, that the criteria concerning the hindrance to the third party does not exist here. This is a facial challenge bought by -- brought by lawyers before the statute took effect, claiming not that the statute violates their own constitutional rights, but that it violates the rights of potential future clients, and that the lawyers will suffer economic harm.
 May I clarify something about this case? Are any of the indigent defendants whose rights the respondent attorneys want to advance -- do any of those people themselves have standing to bring their claims in Federal court now?
 Yes. We argue that there are -- there are three ways that an indigent defendant can bring this claim themselves without having to rely on an attorney in this type of case. First, they can bring the challenge directly through the State courts.
 I'm asking if there are any individuals now before this Court in this case --
 No. None of these -- none of these defendants --
 -- who would be available and who would have remedies or standing to bring their claims. Are we just talking pure hypotheticals here?
 In this facial challenge, we're talking about pure hypotheticals. The -- the three named indigent defendants --
 There were three named indigents.
 Correct.
 They were?
 They were denied counsel.
 Denied counsel, and they were also dismissed at some point down the line?
 Yes. The -- the Sixth Circuit held that the Federal court should abstain from deciding their claims because they could have brought their claims in their direct State appeals. They raised claims about the practice of denying counsel before the statute took effect.
 Mr. Casey, was it a Younger abstention --
 Yes.
 -- with respect to the --
 The -- the Sixth Circuit en banc held that under Younger v. Harris, the Federal court should abstain from deciding the claims of the three indigent defendants.
 So that means that the defendants could never bring this 1983 suit. Only the lawyers arguably could.
 No. Younger v. Harris is only -- only defers the time when a proper Federal civil rights action can be brought. There were -- at the time this action was brought, there were pending State appeals in two of the cases. One of the defendants never appealed at all. The Sixth Circuit recently issued an opinion not --
 Why didn't these lawyers instead of -- instead of trying to sue on their own, why didn't they just offer their services to -- to these defendants through the State courts?
 Your Honor, perhaps opposing counsel could answer that better than I. We say that is the --
 I mean, that's what I don't understand about -- about the fact that they won't -- won't have the right to counsel. It -- it's at least as easy for -- for counsel to appear in cases in which indigents need counsel as it is for counsel to bring their own lawsuit.
 That is our point on the standing issue precisely, Your Honor.
 Didn't -- didn't the Michigan Supreme Court already rule on this issue and said that the statute was constitutional, that there was no right to counsel, therefore no possibility of appointing counsel, paid counsel?
 That's correct. In -- in 2000, the -- the -- while this case was pending, the Michigan Supreme Court issued an opinion, the Bulger decision that's discussed in the briefs, saying that the practice of denying appointed counsel was constitutional. The statute was not in effect at that time. The statute took effect, and in a case just decided in June of this year, People v. Harris, the Michigan Supreme Court relied on Bulger and said this statute is constitutional. It does not violate any rights.
 So going through the State system, there's no possibility that these lawyers or the defendants could successfully assert a right to paid counsel --
 That is correct.
 -- because that's already been decided by the Michigan Supreme Court.
 As -- as a matter of jurisprudence by the State supreme court, yes. Both State and Federal constitutional --
 There -- there's an appeal from -- they could request certiorari from the State supreme court to this Court, I assume.
 There are, in fact, two cases pending, the Harris case that I just mentioned. A petition for certiorari was filed about 2 weeks ago raising this precise claim. There is another case Halbert v. Michigan. It's docket --
 Was there -- was there a cert petition in Bulger itself?
 There was a petition in Bulger.
 And it was denied.
 It was denied. In -- in addition --
 But there -- there is a cert petition filed in what case? In the June case?
 In the -- the case is pending in this Court as Melody Harris v. Michigan. It was filed about 2 weeks ago. I have not been able to find out the docket number. There was another case, Halbert v. Michigan, which is a pro se defendant who was denied counsel. His applications, pro se applications, were denied in the State appellate courts. A pro se petition was filed. I filed a response to that about a month ago. That's docket number 03-10198. It's on this Court's conference for Friday, October 8th.
 So your point is that there are petitions filed here that would enable this Court to decide whether the Michigan Supreme Court was correct in holding the statute constitutional.
 That's correct. There are at least those two petitions pending that I'm aware of in this Court now.
 Do you acknowledge there is a good Federal question there at least?
 Oh, yes. It's -- it's an important question.
 Yes.
 We -- we -- in the Bulger case, I opposed certiorari, saying that yes, it's an important question, but it was correctly decided. At that time, there was no conflict. Then when the Sixth Circuit opinion came up, we filed the petition saying it's an important question and now there's a conflict between the State supreme court and the Federal court of appeals.
 That's the position you've taken in -- in the Halbert case, that the Court should take the case?
 What I said in the Halbert case is that the Court need not grant this petition now because, although it's an important question, the issue is pending in -- in this Tesmer, the current case, Kowalski v. Tesmer. If this Court rules in our favor on standing and then does not reach the constitutional question, then it would be appropriate to grant certiorari in either the Halbert case or the Harris case because the -- the determination of the constitutionality of this statute is important to the State of Michigan.
 Do they have lawyers in those cases?
 Now, the Halbert petition is pro se. The Harris petition has either retained or pro bono counsel. But the -- the constitutionality of the statute is -- excuse me -- is directly challenged in both of those petitions.
 May I ask you if in exercising prudential judgment on whether to accord prudential standing, because I guess there's article III standing here, is it appropriate to take into consideration as one fact that it's already been argued in this case and it's now ripe for decision, or should we just totally ignore that aspect of the case?
 As a matter of judicial economy, there is a point to be made that it -- the issue has been briefed and argued. So perhaps it should be decided. Just last term in Elk Grove v. Newdow, the Court faced a similar situation. They disposed of the case on standing --
 No, but in that case there was a conflict between the interests of the third party and the interests of the litigant or a potential client. Here there's no conflict between the lawyers and the clients.
 That's true. That's true.
 Of course, also bearing upon our prudential judgment, I -- I suppose, would be that in order to reach the merits, we have to do what you assert to be an end run around the Younger abstention. And --
 That's -- that's correct. In my view, the -- the most logical, most appropriate disposition would be to say that these attorneys do not have standing. Therefore, reverse the Sixth Circuit's judgment. There are these other vehicles pending now to reach the constitutional issue.
 But -- but why isn't the Younger abstention problem just like the mootness problem in Craig against Boren? It took one class of litigants unavailable but then allowed the third party to have standing. Why -- why aren't -- aren't your opponents here just like the bartenders in Craig against Boren?
 Well, in determining prudential standing, there are several criteria that should be examined in deciding whether there's an exception to the general rule where a litigant cannot argue the rights of third parties. In Craig v. Boren, the statute directly affected the vendor in that case. It was a statute against sale of certain alcoholic beverages. And in this case we don't have that. Also, in Craig v. Boren, nobody argued prudential standing considerations until the case reached the Supreme Court apparently. But in our case, we have a situation where we have lawyers who do not have any present clients who are not directly affected by the statute. They're not claiming rights --
 No, but they have the same interest that the bartenders had because they won't make some -- sell their services and the bartenders wouldn't sell the booze. I don't see the difference.
 Well, in -- in Craig v. Boren, the -- if the bartenders did not comply with the statute, they'd be subject to criminal penalties. Here, the attorneys will not be subject to any criminal penalties.
 Well, why --
 That wasn't true -- that wasn't true in the Pierce v. Society of Sisters case and it wasn't true in the Singleton case. Both of those cases recognized third party standing, although the prohibition was not on the plaintiff who was seeking to raise the rights of another person.
 That's -- that's true. The parties have discussed many cases. Almost all of them have some factors similar to the circumstances here, and as we've argued, all of them have distinguishing factors too.
 But isn't -- isn't the biggest distinguishing factor the one that you raised in response to Justice Scalia's question? These -- these lawyers can represent somebody on a direct appeal, the same way and raise exactly the same issue that they're trying to raise on third party standing now. Isn't -- isn't that true?
 That -- precisely. Just normal principles of litigation counsel that it is appropriate to have a real party in interest. The criminal defendants whose rights are at stake in the statute litigate that case. If you take the step and allow standing for an attorney, based on speculative claims about future clients and economic harm to the attorney, as the dissent in the Sixth Circuit says, that opens up the possibility of vastly expanding the doctrine of standing beyond what this Court has ever said.
 Well, is it correct as a factual matter that these particular lawyers do have clients that they could be representing --
 That is not in --
 -- on direct appeal?
 -- that is not in the record. In their response brief, they said that they currently do have clients, but in the complaint -- this case was, again, a facial challenge. It was decided on summary disposition or it was a motion to dismiss. It was filed and decided within about a month. And there was no factual development here. If they had actual clients, there would be clearly a closer relationship, but again, those clients would not be hindered from making the claims themselves. There is no reason --
 But the -- the claim that -- I'm sorry.
 Well, it just would seem to me that the lawyers who are advancing this claim may or may not be representing individuals who want to make the same claim, but there -- there must be some lawyers who want to make these claims who don't have any clients, and the question is whether they have standing. And are they to be defeated standing because there are a lot of other lawyers who might also sue?
 In our view, as a general proposition, lawyers should not be given independent standing to raise claims of their clients. When the clients can present their own issues themselves, as they can in this case or in this situation under the statute, there's no need --
 Is that different from Caplin & Drysdale where the lawyers didn't raise the interest of the client and --
 Again, there was an actual client in that case and there was significant money at stake. The lawyers had been paid money from drug forfeiture. They had been paid $25,000, and they wanted another 107 --
 But as far as the actual client, you moved to dismiss. So that's why there's no -- was no back-development. You moved to dismiss. Therefore, you have to assume whatever facts --
 That -- that's correct.
 -- in favor of the opponent of the motion.
 That's correct. But my response on that was to the question of, you know, do they in fact now have clients. There is no allegation in the complaint and no proof that they now have clients. They may --
 But if -- if you assume -- you assume the correctness of the allegations, which you -- you have to do at this point, the allegation is that they would get clients and would be paid but for this bar to payment. Isn't that correct? So if you take them in terms of their claim, you've got to assume that they will have clients and they can bring this -- this issue on behalf of the client.
 Correct. That goes to the criteria of injury in fact and close relationship with the third party. We still have the criteria that I wanted to discuss this morning about hindrance to the right -- to the ability of the third party to litigate for themselves. Excuse me. In our view, there is no need to expand the doctrine of standing to permit lawyers to have independent standing to make these claims because the clients, who are directly affected by the statute, can make them themselves. There are the two pending habeas -- or two pending petitions for certiorari that we've mentioned. There is another case, the Bulger case. Mr. Bulger himself, after he lost in the Michigan courts, he filed a petition for -- for habeas corpus. And the district court granted the writ of habeas corpus. We appealed. That case is now pending in the Sixth Circuit. So that's another vehicle. It is also possible that an indigent inmate himself could bring a section 1983 case. It's simply not necessary to expand the doctrine of standing to give lawyers --
 How could an indigent bring a 1983 case? I thought you said that that would be barred by Younger.
 If they had a pending prosecution, it would be barred by Younger. Once that pending prosecution is over, they could bring a 1983 action.
 Could they? Because I thought this Court had held that -- that you can't bring a 1983 suit if what you're seeking to do is overturn the conviction.
 Under Heck v. Humphrey, if the outcome of the 1983 case would necessarily imply that the conviction or sentence is invalid, you cannot bring the 1983 case. Here, the allegation is simply that they were entitled to counsel. That's not the substantive merits of whether the claim -- whether they are properly convicted or properly sentenced. The Sixth Circuit, in a case decided August 31st --
 Well, if that -- that -- that's -- you're saying that the defendants themselves could not sue now under 1983?
 A -- a defendant who is currently in the State system on direct appeal is barred by the abstention doctrine from filing a 1983 action. But after they go through the State court and lose, in addition to filing a writ of certiorari with this Court --
 And presumably up to this Court, if they want to come that far.
 Oh, certainly. After -- after they go through the State court, they could file a writ of cert in this Court, as the two pending petitions have. They could file a complaint for habeas corpus. They could bring a facial challenge under 1983. In a case called Howard v. Whitbeck from the Sixth Circuit, just decided about a month ago, that was the very question that was decided. An inmate -- a prison inmate, challenging another statute, litigated and lost in the State court, then filed a 1983 action. We argued in a Federal case under Rooker v. Feldman, he was actually trying to seek review of the State court judgment. The district court agreed. But the Sixth Circuit just said Rooker v. Feldman bars the as-applied challenge, but they remanded for a trial on the merits of the facial challenge, which is not barred by Rooker v. Feldman. So an inmate who has been unsuccessful in the State court, under Sixth Circuit law in my jurisdiction, can bring a 1983 action. So there are at least three vehicles that an inmate can bring --
 And do you -- do you agree that that's right? And you said that that's their theory, that they could bring a 1983 action.
 We are not filing a petition for certiorari from that decision. We are abiding by that decision. We're going back and we're going to try that case on the merits of the facial challenge to the statute. That -- that case is Howard v. Whitbeck, docket number 03-1396.
 Of course, what the other side says is, well, yes, maybe they can bring these suits, but in all of those suits, they don't have counsel, what they -- what they --
 That's true. That -- that gets into the -- the merits of the constitutional claim. And in our view, talking about the merits, all that is required in the Michigan application for leave to appeal process is that a defendant identify the issues and ask the appellate court to review it. Unlike Douglas, this is not a review on the merits. An order denying an application for leave is not an affirmance. It's not an adjudication of the merits of any legal issue.
 What -- what do we look to in order to verify what -- what you've just said? Do the Michigan appellate courts catch mistakes all the time? And if so, what's the standard that they use?
 The court rules concerning applications for leave do not set out specific standards. What -- what the court of appeals can do on an application for leave is grant the application, deny it, or issue peremptory relief.
 But what are the standards they use? Where -- where do I look to find out what standards they use, if I get there?
 To the best of my knowledge, there are no published standards in court rule or statute on that. The court is free to exercise its discretion to -- to deny leave for any reason that it chooses.
 Can you give me an example of where they grant leave to appeal, and if not -- and it's not one of the exceptions listed in the statute such as incorrect --
 If -- if --
 -- such as incorrect sentencing?
 Well, if -- under the statute, if the court of appeals grants leave, counsel is automatically appointed.
 Right. What are the instances in which they grant leave, other than sentencing or some other statutory --
 They're -- most often they are sentencing issues. The statistics we put in our brief, in footnote 25 of our brief, indicated that out of the -- in 2001, there were 38,000 guilty plea convictions. The court of appeals that year disposed of 7,600 cases. 14 percent of them were guilty plea appeals. Most of them were disposed of by order. There were somewhere in the neighborhood of about 50 decisions -- opinions issued in guilty plea cases. I have not canvased all of them. I suspect that the vast majority of them are sentencing issues.
 Do we -- do we know whether any of those were cases that didn't fall under the four categories where you a -- a right to?
 In every case where there was an opinion, counsel was appointed. The statute requires it.
 But one of the problems, I thought, for the indigent is the rulings -- am I correct -- in Michigan, that they're not required -- say, there's an objection. There's no written record that the indigent could look to, even assuming he could understand it, to -- to determine what issues might be raised on -- on appeal.
 I believe you're incorrect on that, Your Honor. The -- what an indigent inmate will -- or defendant will have available to him to prepare an application for leave to appeal is a transcript of the proceedings. He's entitled to that for free. He will have whatever written motions and written decisions the trial judge may have issued. He will have -- in the transcript, he will have the oral motions and the decisions of the judge, and then in addition to whatever pro se materials, as in the Ross v. Moffitt case, the inmate can muster. In -- in these cases, there are other pro se materials available. The district court's opinion in this case noted that there is a -- a form brief, 38-page brief that was circulating among inmates on the precise question of entitlement to counsel, which two of the defendants used in their State court appeals. But in determining whether counsel is constitutionally required under Ross v. Moffitt, this Court has said you look to two things. Are the merits decided? What is the nature of the appellate process? And if the merits are not being decided, as in the Michigan case, we say that falls within the Ross v. Moffitt line of cases, unlike the Douglas case. In -- in addition to the nature of the appellate proceedings, he --
 Well, now, your -- your opponents quote some language from the -- one of the Michigan court of appeals which suggests that the reason that an appeal was denied was it had no merit.
 A -- a typical order that the court of appeals issues when it denies an application for leave to appeal says, denied for lack of merit on the grounds presented. But there is published, controlling Michigan authority, which we cited in our brief, that says that language does not mean that the court of appeals looked at the merits of the underlying legal issue. What -- what the court is looking at is the question of whether to grant leave or deny leave. If they grant leave, counsel will be appointed. In a very real sense --
 What -- what are they getting at when they say merit? I mean, I take it you concede there was a quotation from that Contineri case on -- cited on page 30 of their brief. I mean, what -- what is the reference to merit supposed to mean?
 I -- I do not know why the court of appeals uses that language. What I do know is that the --
 Isn't the reasonable thing to assume that they use it as we would normally expect it to --
 Well, the --
 -- to mean by the words they use?
 On its face, that would be the first impression that is given from those words. However, the published opinions of the court of appeals we've cited in our brief reject that, and they say that in an application for leave to appeal, the court of appeals is not adjudicating the merits. My opposing counsel in this case was counsel of record in the Bulger case in the Michigan Supreme Court. He made exactly that same argument. He persuaded the dissent in that opinion, but he did not persuade the majority. They didn't decide the issue precisely, but he has been arguing that ever since. But the -- all the precedent that Michigan has on that point we've cited in our brief. Those are not decisions on the merits.
 Is it true that Michigan is the only State in the Union so far that denies counsel on a first appeal, whether discretionary or mandatory?
 I believe that is incorrect. The plaintiffs have cited a 1987 habeas corpus case that purports to make a national survey. In the Michigan v. Bulger Michigan Supreme Court opinion in footnote 3, they cited a 1992 Arizona study which reached almost an opposite conclusion. They said there were only seven States which give unrestricted right of appeal, and there were 21 States that prohibited appeals --
 Not -- not the right of appeal. The right to counsel, whether it's a mandatory or --
 It's my understanding that Michigan may be the only State that has a specific statute prohibiting it with exceptions like this, but it's also my understanding that the practice in many other States is that counsel is routinely denied in appeals from guilty pleas. I'd like to reserve my remaining time.
 Very well, Mr. Casey. Mr. Moran, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: In fact, in the 41 years since this Court's decision in Douglas, no State, not one, not even a -- a territorial jurisdiction, except for Michigan, has even attempted to deny counsel to any indigents appealing any type of first tier appeal.
 Well, Mr. Moran, this is a very important question, whether the Michigan law can survive. But I think before we can address that, we have to decide whether there is standing for the lawyers you represent here today, and that's a much tougher question I think. Is it possible that this Court could grant certiorari in one of the pending petitions and resolve the underlying issue of constitutionality of Michigan's unusual law?
 It is, of course, possible, Justice O'Connor, that this Court could do that.
 And if we were to grant you standing here, wouldn't we have sort of expanded our existing holdings on who has standing?
 Not at all, Justice O'Connor. This case fits squarely within the two prior lawyer-client standing cases, the Triplett case in which this Court unanimously found standing for a -- for a lawyer representing black lung claimants, and the Caplin &Drysdale case in which this Court found standing for a third party assertion by a firm representing a criminal defendant. And what those three cases have in common and what makes them unique is that this can only arise in a case in which the statute or law being challenged disentitles the client either through loss of funding or through, like Michigan's law, a statute -- disentitles the client to representation. Any other change in the law, tort reform brought up by my --
 Well, it doesn't really disentitle the client to representation. It says counsel won't be appointed for him. But presumably these lawyers could have offered their services.
 Mr. Chief Justice, that wouldn't be practical, and that raises a point that Justice Souter also raised in the argument. It wouldn't be practical for Mr. Fitzgerald or Mr. Vogler to offer their services pro bono to some indigent in this position because to do so would probably -- probably be unethical or malpractice. First of all, they can't be appointed. What the statute prohibits is the appointment of counsel like Mr. Fitzgerald and Mr. Vogler. So they -- they cannot form an attorney-client relationship by operation of law.
 But isn't the answer that all they have to do is to say, okay, I will represent him but I am representing him with a claim for funds? And at the end of the day, regardless of what the Michigan law says, I'm going to say to the State of Michigan, through the court, pay me for what I did. That isn't a waiver and there's nothing unethical about it.
 But Justice Souter, that's impractical and unethical in this case because if Mr. Fitzgerald and Mr. Vogler were to do that, they would have to represent the indigent on his or her underlying plea and sentencing issues --
 Right.
 -- or those would be lost forever --
 Absolutely.
 -- because the time would fly. And so if they also represented him on the underlying plea and sentencing issues, then this person would not -- then the underlying defendant would not be a person with standing to raise the lack of counsel because in fact they have counsel.
 Well, which -- which indigent defendants are the attorney plaintiffs asserting claims on behalf of here? Is it past defendants?
 This was -- this was -- for Mr. Fitzgerald and Mr. Vogler, they were challenging both the prestatutory practice of the three defendant judges.
 You're talking about the two individuals, but they've been dismissed.
 No. Mr. Fitzgerald and Mr. Vogler, Justice O'Connor, are the attorneys. They were -- they --
 Well, I'm trying to find out what indigent criminal defendants are these attorneys attempting to represent here.
 They routinely take appointments. They are on a list of --
 Future defendants?
 Presently and future defendants.
 Past defendants?
 Past defendants. They -- they --
 Well, if it's past defendants who were convicted and didn't have counsel, how is it consistent with Heck v. Humphrey that they could be here, these attorneys?
 I think I -- I think I misspoke. At the time the statute was passed, it had not gone into effect. This challenge was filed in order to prevent the statute from going into effect, to prevent approximately 2,000 Michigan indigents a year being denied the right to counsel.
 Well, are you asserting then that these attorney respondents are here trying to represent future defendants?
 Present and future defendants.
 And if it's present defendants, how is that consistent with Younger? How can they do that?
 Well, they're not representing any named defendants. The -- the problem is that as the statute goes into effect, they will presumably not receive any further funding for --
 Well, if it's future people, how is it consistent with Los Angeles v. Lyons? I mean, I just don't see how these attorney representatives get here.
 Well, they're in exactly the same position as the bartender in -- or the beer vendor in -- in Craig v. Boren. They're representing prospective clients, prospective patients as in Singleton v. Wulff again. This Court has over and over again -- in fact, in Triplett itself, this Court recognized that -- specifically said that in Triplett that it applied to prospective clients, that the -- and it said that in Triplett that -- it quoted the three factors. And it said that -- excuse me. I'm looking at the wrong page. It said in Triplett that a restriction upon the fees a lawyer may charge applied to the lawyer's prospective client of a due process right to obtain legal representation falls squarely within this principle. And that was the principle of third party standing that this Court cited --
 Well, of course, in Triplett, the attorneys themselves were subject to discipline. They were raising third party rights in order to defend a proceeding brought against themselves. It seems to me that's distinguishable.
 That's --
 And the same thing in the bar case. The -- the restriction against the sale of -- of liquor was a restriction imposed upon the person seeking to raise the third party right. But here, there's no restriction that applies to these lawyers who are seeking to raise the third party right.
 But Justice Scalia, this Court has never held that such a restriction is a condition precedent or required in order for a person to assert third party rights.
 That's so, but we've never held what you want us to hold either, that -- that when the law does not bear upon you personally, you have the right to raise the claim of a prospective client. We've never held that either.
 Well, in -- Singleton is a case in which there was no direct sanction against the doctors who provided Medicaid abortions.
 Well, just as -- as to Triplett and Boren, you can't cite those two cases and say those are controlling and then say, well, we've never held it.
 I'm sorry. I didn't follow that question, Justice Kennedy.
 Well, we've said that Triplett and -- and Boren are -- are distinguishable, and you said, well, we've never ruled on this point. Well, then Triplett and Boren aren't controlling.
 Well, I think you have ruled on this Court -- point by many times recognizing that even persons against whom the statute or law would not directly affect -- for example, all the way back to 1925 with Pierce v. Society of Sisters, there was no legal prohibition against the school. The legal prohibition was against the students not going to public school. So 80 years ago this Court recognized that. In a situation analogous to this, the school --
 It was -- a prohibition was on the parents and there were no parents as plaintiffs in that case --
 That's right.
 -- only the schools.
 That's correct, Justice Ginsburg. It was the school that was -- was held to have standing to assert the rights of future and current students, and the same is true of the Singleton case where, again, there was no particular restriction against the doctors. It was simply that they would not get funding.
 But there was a problem, wasn't there, in Singleton that -- that the part that said that the doctors could raise the patients' right as opposed to the doctor's own right to practice or whatever, that that was only a plurality?
 That was a plurality portion of the opinion.
 Well, it shouldn't be cited then. You're citing it for something that the Court didn't hold.
 Well, actually we've cited it in our brief only for the article III proposition which this Court unanimously agreed that the doctors had article III standing because there was an economic energy --
 You -- I thought you were citing it here for the quite different proposition that -- that you can raise third party rights.
 But ultimately this Court in Singleton allowed the doctors' claim on behalf of the patients to proceed. I understand that it was a plurality opinion on the -- on the jus tertii standing.
 I -- I could accept -- I guess I probably would accept your position if I did not think there -- there was another equally workable alternative here. And I didn't understand your answer to my earlier question in which you said, if I recall correctly, that it would be unethical for these lawyers to represent a -- a future client, subject to a claim to be paid and on behalf both of the client and, I suppose, of themselves, but essentially on behalf of a client, say, there is a right to State money to pay the lawyer who is representing them. It would be, as I understood you to say, unethical for the lawyer to proceed on that basis. And I don't understand the reason for your answer.
 I think I might have misunderstood your question, Justice Souter. The question I understood was why don't they represent people and raise only the entitlement to right to counsel. In the Bulger case, for example, the Michigan Supreme Court --
 Oh, no. I'm assuming they -- they represent the client for all purposes and one of the client's claims is, pay my lawyer. I don't have any money. Your statute is unconstitutional. Why cannot the lawyer pursue that claim on behalf of the client and -- and raise exactly the issue that is being raised in substance here?
 If that attempt -- if that method were attempted, Mr. Casey would undoubtedly argue that the attorney would not be entitled to any funding because the attorney was never appointed. You can't just go out and find indigents that you would like to represent. You have to be formally appointed.
 Well, except that that's a very formalistic answer. The -- the claim, in effect, would be I have a right to be appointed whatever your statute says because -- or my -- the -- the client would say my lawyer -- I have a right to appointed counsel, whatever your statute says, with the consequence of payment. So to say, well, they're not appointed, that's the question. Should they be appointed? I don't see why they cannot raise that issue.
 The problem is is that the way the Michigan system works, it works on a strict rotation system, and so there's no -- there's no line-jumping here. There's no right for a -- a client to -- to request a certain attorney, for a certain attorney to go the head of the queue and say I would like to represent that fellow and be --
 Okay, but these -- these lawyers are in the rotation. Are you suggesting that the rotation is so enormous that it will be 20 years before they get another client?
 No, not at all. They --
 Okay.
 They routinely --
 I mean, your -- your claim is that they are going to get clients in the future and they -- they ought to have a right to be paid when the time comes. So why doesn't, number one, a lawyer representing the next client, whoever he may be, have a right to raise this, and why doesn't each one of these lawyers have a right to raise it presumably within a reasonable time when they next come up in the rotation?
 I think it's clear that the Michigan courts would unquestionably hold that a lawyer who simply inserts himself into a relationship without formal court appointment is not entitled to be paid.
 Sure they would, and that's what will get brought to this Court. That's what we're here for.
 But the problem is, Justice Souter, we would then have an issue of Michigan law inserted as to whether --
 No, because the claim is that they have a right under Federal law to an effective procedure whereby paid counsel can be supplied to them. That's a Federal issue, not a State issue.
 That part is a Federal issue, but what Michigan --
 That's all you've got to get up here.
 It's at least an argument.
 It's an argument.
 And even if they lose on it, they still will have -- would have raised the issue that you are most concerned about getting raised. They're not -- they're not so much interested in the so many dollars for this particular representation. Even if they lose on what seems to me at least a close argument, they will have raised the question you're trying to raise today.
 And they will have to do so without any prospect of being paid, and that's -- that's the problem.
 Who's paying them for this lawsuit?
 They're not being paid for this lawsuit.
 Right. Exactly the same situation. They can -- they can bring the case directly for the client they're representing just as readily as they can bring this one. And if that is true, why is there an impediment to raising the issue unless we recognize third party standing?
 Because Justice Souter, they would have to represent them on all of their issues. They would have to represent them on their plea and sentencing issues without being paid. And that's not what they're doing in this --
 Without being paid if they lose --
 -- in this litigation.
 -- being paid if they win. In this case, if they win, they don't get a dime because they're not representing a client. All they get is a declaration.
 And --
 And they'd be better off to represent a real client.
 That's right. They have a shot at getting paid using this other method.
 In -- in this lawsuit, if we win on the merits, they will then get far more appointments on the rotation system and then they will get paid for those appointments.
 Why will they get more appointments?
 Because --
 I thought you said there's a strict rotation system. When your name comes up, you get an appointment. How is that going to change regardless of how this comes out?
 Because the statute, which is now in effect -- and this goes, by the way, back to the issue of prudential standing --
 Oh, you're just saying there -- there's going to be a further class of clients to be represented on the rotation.
 Correct. Far more.
 Okay, but that's -- that's true.
 And -- and while this Court considers these issues of prudential standing, thousands of Michigan defendants will be denied the right to counsel --
 And while this suit is being brought, we can't do the simple thing, which is to take a case from an indigent who's raising it that we happen to have on our docket and face it directly because everybody is tied up in these knots on standing. I mean, what -- what is it that -- that you -- led you to bring this case rather than just filing an amicus brief in a case brought by a real indigent who wants a lawyer?
 Because there -- there was no person in position at the time. The problem was we had to file this litigation before the statute went into effect because once the statute went into effect, thousands of Michigan indigents would be denied the right to counsel every year and would suffer probably irreparable damage to their right to appeal --
 I see -- I see that. That's a good answer. And the -- the question I have is if I now, since we have real indigents, believe that there absolutely is a way for a real indigent to raise this claim that isn't even hard, you could file an amicus brief. Suppose I believed that, and I do believe it actually. If I believe it, then does your third party standing claim disappear?
 No.
 All right. Now, if it doesn't disappear and I hold in your favor, would I then be opening the door to any lawyer whose pocketbook is hurt by tort reform, by any change at all, you know, that means less money for him, and we'd be besieged with people? Instead of the clients, we'd have all the lawyers in complaining that they want to be richer. Now, that's what's worrying me. So on my assumption, how could I possibly decide in your favor without opening that door?
 Your --
 That's the question I'd like answered.
 Your Honor, the only kind of case to which this applies is a case exactly like Triplett, a case exactly like Caplin & Drysdale where the claim is that the underlying change in the law or the underlying law disenfranchises or disentitles the indigent or the criminal defendant or the defendant to representation.
 Because?
 Because, first of all, if the indigent or the client still has representation, then there is no hindrance to the third party raising it themselves.
 Why is that? Why would a change in substantive law --
 No, no. I assumed there's --
 -- have the same result? Suppose there's a change in -- in the antitrust law and -- and the person says this change -- this change has the -- the effect of -- of denying me equal protection of the law. That's the claim that the -- that the client would have. But there's a lawyer who says, my goodness, this change will mean there are many -- many fewer antitrust suits. I can demonstrate that. That's my specialty, antitrust law. I'm going to lose a lot of business. Why wouldn't he have the right to raise the equal protection claim of the prospective client?
 Because the client could raise it directly, represented by the attorney. And so the third prong in jus tertii standing would be clearly missing in that case.
 No. I'm sorry. I -- I -- Justice Scalia and I were assuming the same thing. If I assume that there's no problem with the real person, the indigent, raising the claim himself -- and I'm saying on that assumption, which I believe, then if I were to decide in your favor, how would I not be opening the door that I wanted to keep firmly closed?
 But this Court's precedents indicate, Justice Breyer, that the indigents do have a significant hindrance to filing their claims themselves.
 Oh, okay. No. I agree with you. If in fact you think that there's a problem about a real indigent bringing a claim in Michigan, although we have two on the docket, if I accepted that premise, I would begin to think you were right. So then what I was trying to explore is whether the whole thing comes down to whether I accept that premise. And of course, that's what's everybody has been talking about, and I do see at the moment a couple of very good ways that indigents can bring it themselves, and indeed they have.
 But I think --
 But everything comes down to that. Right?
 I think an answer I need to give to -- to cut through all of this is that third party standing is never predicated on the impossible. Third party standing is never predicated on the idea that third party standing is appropriate only if it is impossible for some indigent to make it into court or some third party or the person whose rights are being violated to make it into court. All that must be shown from this Court's precedents is a hindrance. So this Court did not require in Craig v. Boren that it was impossible that some young man could get his claim in front of the court.
 It was altogether possible there had been a young man. The problem was he turned 21. So the case would -- from his point of view was moot.
 Right, but this Court never suggested that it was -- showing that it was impossible for someone to quickly get his claim before the court was --
 I think I agree with you on that. I'm just -- the reason I think it's so easy is because we get indigents. We get thousands of them. And all you have to have is some indigent saying, hey, I want a lawyer. Okay? That's all. He has to be able to write those words. And at that point, you and the others come in with amicus briefs, if necessary, and support him.
 Well, the problem is is that in the meantime thousands of Michigan indigents are going to be denied counsel.
 May I ask you a practical question about what is currently before the Court? Mr. Casey I think told us that the Halbert case is on for the October 8th conference. If we should grant cert in either of those direct from the Michigan Supreme Court -- Michigan Supreme Court following Bulger, so you always leave before then. If we should grant in either of those cases, wouldn't the wise thing be to simply hold this case till those are decided?
 That may well be a wise course of action -- action, Justice Ginsburg. I should point out that Mr. Casey, when he filed the response to the Bulger cert petition, brought this Court's attention to the fact that this underlying litigation was proceeding in a case that was then called Tesmer v. Granholm. And so he brought to this Court's attention that we had already prevailed in Federal district court in Tesmer v. Granholm as a suggestion as to why this Court did not need to grant cert in the Bulger case, and so this Court did not grant cert. I don't know, of course -- I don't know why this Court did not grant cert in Bulger.
 But he said now he's not taking that position in the Halbert case.
 But I can be confident that if there are any procedural hurdles to this Court's exercise of jurisdiction in any of the State cases, Mr. Casey will alert this Court of them. And there may well be. For example, in the Melody Harris case, the Michigan Supreme Court remanded for further -- remanded for her to then file an application for leave to appeal on her underlying plea and sentencing issues without the assistance of counsel. Was the Michigan Supreme Court's order a final order? I don't know. This Court would obviously have to resolve that. But I can be confident that Mr. Casey will certainly bring up any procedural hurdles. And of course, this Court cannot exercise jurisdiction it does not have in a case just because it would be more convenient to do so. This Court does have jurisdiction in this case. The petitioners never challenged prudential standing at any point in this litigation -- they -- they challenged only article III standing, injury in fact -- until this Court. And so part of the reason we don't have a better record is because this came on a motion to dismiss. This Court recognized in Lujan that a motion to dismiss is different than a summary judgment, requires a -- a different procedural posture. It requires the assumption of facts being true.
 But -- but no facts -- no additional facts would -- would affect the central point that -- that we've been devoting most of this discussion to, which is whether there is an impediment or not to -- to the -- the actual individuals whose rights your clients are asserting raising their own rights. No additional facts bear upon that it seems to me.
 I agree with you on that, Justice Scalia.
 Then what case holds that there must be an impediment for the third party? I keep coming back to Craig against Boren. They could have filed another class action and say that they filed a class action and had standing. Would we have suddenly decided we won't decide the merits even though it's been argued and both sides have had their day in court?
 I agree with you, Justice Stevens.
 What is the source of the requirement there must be an impediment to the third party suit?
 Well, this Court has said so many times, and Powers v. Ohio, for example, noted the impediment to the --
 That -- where they granted standing.
 That's right.
 Have they ever denied standing on the ground that there was no impediment to the third party suit? I don't think we have.
 I don't believe in all of the cases that both parties cited that there are any cases in which this Court has said that there was no impediment to the third party. It is -- it is certainly not the standard --
 Well, do you think that was just idle observation then?
 Not at all, Mr. Chief Justice. I didn't mean to be light about that.
 It doesn't have to be idle to be dicta, though, does it?
 There -- we -- we fully concede there need to be an impediment, but what it does not require is the showing that it is impossible for someone to get here. What is a showing is that for most -- for the average person in the class, just like the average grand juror in Campbell v. Louisiana, or the average venire person in Powers v. Ohio, there are impediments to getting here.
 Do you fully concede there must be an impediment even though the Court has never so held?
 I'm willing to concede that because it is so clear to me that there is, that there is an impediment that trying to get into Federal court, trying to get here, for that matter, trying to get into Federal district court -- for an indigent, a typical person who is very likely -- someone like Mr. Carter, functionally illiterate, poorly educated, completely unaware of his rights, to try and navigate the -- the procedural hurdles of the Michigan system to get all the way through the Michigan system and then into Federal court, that is a daunting hurdle. And that's Evitts v. Lucey. This Court has recognized time and time again in -- in plea cases, Roe v. -- Roe v. Flores-Ortega. This Court has recognized time and time again in Peguero that even in a plea case a typical indigent is completely incapable of getting his or her case held -- heard, especially if you have to go through multiple layers of appeal without a counsel for the first tier. And that is the problem here. On the merits, I certainly would like to correct Mr. Casey's representations about the -- the nature of the Michigan system. The -- a properly filed application for leave to appeal is invariably denied for lack of merit in the grounds presented. I certainly urge this Court to look at each and every one of the cases that Mr. Casey has cited for the proposition that that is not a determination on the merits because not one of them says that. Not one of them specifically says that a order denying leave for lack of merit on the grounds presented is not a decision on the merits.
 Could -- could you give me an example, just from your experience in practice, where there's an important issue raised after a guilty plea that requires an appeal where it's not one of the statutory exceptions?
 Many, many.
 Most -- what are -- what are those cases?
 Improper denial of jail credit, making -- improper denial of jail credit.
 That's not sentencing?
 That is a sentencing error.
 Okay, but that's covered by the statute.
 No, it's not. The statute -- the only exceptions in the statute are for guidelines departures --
 Okay.
 -- and for -- and then if the indigent gets the appeal granted, but that's putting -- that's after the indigent has had to file an application identifying his or her own issues without any assistance of counsel. Double jeopardy issues. Double jeopardy issues arise in Michigan all the time; whether sentences should be consecutive or concurrent; whether there's been a breach of the plea bargain. All of these issues arise in Michigan courts every day, and while we are --
 Are there instances where Michigan has denied the right to appeal when those claims are raised?
 The problem, Your Honor, is that an indigent can't raise -- a typical indigent would be completely incapable of identifying this -- these sorts of issues.
 His counsel will have raised them. And -- and most, if not all, of those have to have been raised by counsel.
 Your Honor, Michigan requires that ineffective assistance of counsel claims be raised on direct appeal. So if counsel has not raised the issue, then the indigent would have to recognize that by -- by himself, and then raise that issue, the ineffective assistance of counsel, on direct appeal. Further, even if counsel has recognized it, what we typically would have would be an oral objection at a sentencing hearing. For example, Your Honor, I think these sentences should be concurrent, and the judge says, no, I'm going to make them consecutive. That's an oral objection. The indigent will have to be able to get the transcripts, get the register of actions, get all the necessary documents, realize that that's a winning issue, that it does not put him at additional risk. That's another factor. One of the -- one of the points that a counsel can help with is tell an indigent, you don't want to take this appeal because success may result in revocation of the plea bargain and an additional risk -- will have to realize that this is in my best interest to go ahead with this appeal. This is my issue. Find the cases, find the controlling authority. And even issues as complex as a Blakely issue, which this Court, of course, will be dealing with this afternoon, that is an open issue of Michigan law right now. Is -- are the Michigan sentencing guidelines unconstitutional or at least the application of them as a result of this Court's decision in Blakely? Right now, as a result of the order in Melody Harris, a typical Michigan indigent will have to raise that complex issue of Sixth Amendment law by herself or by himself, and that's simply an impossible burden, or the issue will be lost forever. And that is -- that is a burden that no indigent can meet. And so I would hope that this Court would not get hung up on the standing issue because this issue is so important right now, as a result of the Michigan Supreme Court's order. Right now these issues are happening and right now Michigan indigents are being denied the assistance of counsel. Unique in the Nation. And so this case has been adversely argued. That's the point of prudential standing. The petitioners waived the prudential standing issues below. They challenged only article III standing. And so there is every reason for this Court not to wait for a perfect case that may never come.
 Are you familiar with the Halbert case? You mentioned that there might be a finality problem in Harris.
 I'm not familiar with that case, Your Honor. I just became aware of it by letter a few days ago and I have not had a chance to find out anything more about it. I have not seen the cert petition in that case. I'm not aware of the underlying -- excuse me -- the underlying order from the Michigan courts in that case. But there may never be a perfect case, but this case is adverse and that meets all the -- all the requirements for prudential standing. Article III standing is clearly met in this case, and I hope this Court will affirm the decision of the Sixth Circuit. If this Court has no further questions.
 Thank you, Mr. Moran. Mr. Casey, you have 3 minutes left.
 Did you waive the objection to prudential standing --
 We did not waive any of the standing claims in this case. We've discussed that in our reply brief. I've cited pages of the briefs where these issues were discussed. And the overriding fact is that the district court, the three-judge panel in the court of appeals, and the en banc Sixth Circuit all decided these issues. They have been properly raised and preserved and they're before the Court.
 Did you file a brief in opposition in Halbert?
 Yes, I did. I filed that about a month ago.
 And does that have any procedural impediments?
 Not to my knowledge. That individual was convicted in pleas, asked for counsel citing the Federal litigation in this Kowalski v. Tesmer case. It was denied. He filed a pro se application for leave to appeal challenging the denial of counsel and raising his sentencing issues --
 So what was the basis for your opposition to cert?
 That the Court need not grant cert in that case because the issue is pending in this case. If -- if this case goes away, then I suspect we will agree that that would be an appropriate vehicle to decide the constitutional issue. As long as this case is pending in which the issue is raised, I suggested that the Court need not grant cert in that case to decide the issue. If the issue is not going to be decided in this case, then that would be an appropriate vehicle to raise and decide the issue. On the standing point, if the plaintiffs here are given standing, it would be a significant expansion of this Court's standing doctrine. This Court has never found third party standing when a litigant is not directly affected by a statute and there is no close existing relationship with the third party and there is no hindrance. We've discussed many cases in which some of these factors are present and others are distinguishing factors. This -- this case is, in some respects, unlike all of them. There would be a significant expansion of the doctrine. On the merits of the issue, a constitutional right to appointed counsel, under the Michigan system, please read the cases I've cited in my brief, particularly the Bobenal decision, which I've cited in my principal brief. In a footnote in my brief, I quote the orders that the court of appeals was considering. They have the same language that is at issue here. Controlling Michigan precedent says that applications for leave to appeal are not decisions on the merits. All an inmate has to do is identify the issues. That can be done. It has been done, as seen by the two pending petitions for cert. If the Court has no further questions.
 Thank you, Mr. Casey. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument now on number 03-409, KP Permanent Make-Up, Inc. versus Lasting Impression, Inc. Mr. Machat?
 Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: This case concerns whether or not a defendant in a trademark case who fulfills the statutory requirements of the fair-use defense must also demonstrate an absence of likelihood of confusion in order to avail himself of that affirmative defense. Now, here are four reasons why that should not be the case. In the first place, if that is the case it would render the defense useless, because if there is no likelihood of confusion, then there's no trademark infringement to begin with, so why should someone try to prove an affirmative defense when there's no trademark infringement? Second --
 You agree with Judge Niemeyer's comment in the Fourth Circuit case, I take it.
 Yes. Secondly, what it does is, is it shifts the burden of proof from the plaintiff to the defendant. There's no reason ever to -- there's no reason ever to prove an absence of likelihood of confusion if you're a defendant. And then, also there's no reason to prove the fair-use defense if you have to also prove an absence of likelihood of confusion, because it's just much more of a burden. You have to prove, first of all --
 In this case, did the plaintiff offer any evidence of confusion, consumer confusion?
 This was a motion for summary judgement.
 And was there anything in the affidavits or attachments that have to do with consumer confusion on behalf of the plaintiff?
 Yeah, actually, the record does contain some references to confusion. The -- in this case, the respondent, they were claiming that they did have some people that actually were confused. And when that happens, you need to look at what is causing the confusion. And essentially --
 Well, it might make it necessary for a defendant in such a situation, in order to avoid some kind of summary judgement, to also offer evidence on consumer confusion to try to show there wasn't any.
 Well, but that's shifting the issue, then, to whether or not there's likelihood of confusion. However, even if there -- what I'm saying is even if there is confusion, if you meet the elements of the fair-use defense, it doesn't matter if there's any resulting confusion.
 Well, is it possible that showing consumer confusion could be considered by the court on the issue of what's the fair use? What's fair?
 Well, the thing is, a lot of times when there is confusion, that is evidence that the term or the word being used is not being used as a mark, so the confusion illustrates that -- one of the elements of the fair-use defense, whether or not the term is being used descriptively or as a mark, whether or not those elements are being met. The confusion does not go to the likelihood of confusion issue; rather, it goes to the individual elements of the fair-use --
 Well, but I'm interested in Justice O'Connor's point. Suppose it's a close case as to whether or not the use is in good faith and it's only discretion. With reference to good faith, suppose there's very substantial confusion that's caused by the allegedly infringing mark. Does that at least bear on a good-faith assessment? In other words, suppose that it were shown that the owner of the non-registered mark, the alleged infringing mark, used the phrase -- not the mark, but used the phrase -- deliberately in order to cause confusion. Would that --
 Yes -- well, that would show an absence of good faith, and good faith is one of the elements of the fair-use defense.
 Well, so that if you know that there's going to be confusion, there is no good faith? You wouldn't go that far.
 No, I wouldn't go that far. It's a balancing Test and that's why it says "fairly and in good faith," and you have to look at how descriptive the word is, in particular. For instance, if you're using the word "best" -- as in "best buy" or "best foods" -- I mean, best is an extremely descriptive word. So you could go a lot further in claiming, "Hey, I have the best -- I have the best food," or, you know, "Come to my store. I have the best buy." And, yes, there could be confusion, but that is one of the risks that --
 Well, is it your position that subjective good faith is always a defense, no matter how unreasonable it is or how much confusion results? Is that your position?
 No, I wouldn't go that far, because you also have to look at the objective use.
 I would have thought that consumer confusion is one factor in determining fairness; perhaps not subjective good faith, but certainly on the issue of fairness. Some of the amici take that position, do they not?
 Well, I think -- I was reading the amici brief last night. I think the issue of confusion, as the INTA brief points out, you have to look at whether the confusion is illustrative of whether or not the term is being used as a mark or not. The same evidence that shows confusion can be used to show a likelihood of confusion on the plaintiff's side of the case, and that same evidence can also be used to -- in the case of determining whether or not the elements of a fair use defense have been -- have been met.
 What did -- what did the district court do here? Did it grant summary judgement or deny summary judgement?
 The -- well, the district court granted summary judgement on a fair-use defense. It found that, in this case, the mark was being used -- sorry, that my client's words were being used not as a mark, only to describe, and that the use was done fairly and in good faith. The Ninth Circuit --
 But the district court -- the district court -- this way -- [Laughter.]
 -- seemed to focus on the use of the word "micro color," just the word. It didn't bring up what was new in 1999. That is, a brochure appears where "micro color" is not simply a word, but it appears in a logo-like fashion. And as I understand it, the district court said you could use "micro color" as you had been using it since 1991. It didn't refer to the stylized 1999 new brochure. So --
 Yes, that is correct. The district court, in its opinion, did not specifically refer to that use in 1999.
 And it might not have been confusion just by using the word. But when you're using it in the logo-like appearance, maybe that's different.
 Well, in the abstract case, it could be. I would argue, though, in this case it's not, because that was one use on a -- you have a ten-page brochure, and it's one use on a ten-page brochure. And you -- on that same page of the brochure, at the very bottom, it said my client's name, KP Permanent Makeup. So --
 Well, that wouldn't relate to the question presented here, anyway. It wouldn't relate to the reason for which we took this case.
 Correct.
 I mean, maybe the district court misinterpreted or misapplied "fairly and in good faith" if it didn't consider the logo-like use. But, as I understand it, the only question we have before us is whether the "fairly and in good faith" provision is an exception even when there is confusion.
 Yes, I would agree.
 Is that -- I'm -- and I'm mixed up. I thought that the issue is whether you, on your side, have to present evidence of no confusion.
 Yes, I think --
 So as far as --
 -- I think we're both saying the same thing
 So as far as Justice O'Connor's question is concerned, I thought your answer would be, if they want to go and present evidence that there is confusion, to the point where it's so obviously unfair, it's ridiculous, they can do it. I mean, do you object to that?
 No, I agree.
 No. So your answer to her question is, of course it could be relevant. Let the other side come in and show that it's relevant. You don't have to show that there is no confusion.
 Absolutely.
 That's where we are, is that right?
 That's exactly --
 Okay.
 -- where we are.
 Could you give us a -- I'd be much more sympathetic to your case if I could readily envision a situation where there is confusion but, nonetheless, the use is fair and in good faith. Give me a clear example.
 In my particular case? This --
 No. I mean, make up one --
 Okay.
 -- that's really clear.
 Let's use the words "best buy." Best Buy is a famous consumer electronics store, and somebody opens up a shop, say Mark's, that says, "Mark's, he has the best buy." He wants to advertise on radio, "Come down to Mark's Electronics for the best buy - for the best buy in consumer electronics, go to Mark's," and he keeps using those words "best buy."
 I don't think there's any likelihood of confusion there, do you? I mean --
 Well --
 -- what if he just takes out an ad that says, "Best Buy," exclamation point? That would be closer.
 Okay, in that case there would be confusion, but Mark, in that case, would be using "best buy" as a trademark, not only to describe; and, therefore, he would not fulfill the statutory requirements of a fair use defense. Because a lot of times when confusion comes up, it comes up in the case that --
 I didn't mean to make it that in my hypothetical. You're just putting it in bold type at the beginning of the piece, "Best Buy," exclamation point. That means it's a trademark?
 Well, it would be evidence that it is a trademark. You have to -- it depends how big the words "best buy" were in relation to the word "Mark's Electronics."
 Well, but if you had a -- if you had a headline at the head of an ad, "Great Sale," that surely is not a trademark, just because you have it in boldfaced print.
 I agree, it's not necessarily a trademark. You have to look at the totality of the ad, and you have to look at what the person is trying to use to tell consumers to identify and distinguish the products, or, in this case, the store.
 I suppose if you have a sign that says "Park `n Fly" and an arrow, with a capital "P" and a capital "F," then it's arguably being used as a trademark.
 Well --
 Whereas, if you say in a brochure, "Rent a car from us, and park and fly," then that's okay. Is that the distinction?
 Yes, but I'd go even further and say that the -- if you had a big sign that said "Park `n Fly," and it's next to an airport, that would not necessarily be a trademark. I mean, if it said, like, "Jerry's Airport Parking, Park and Fly," I would say that's being a descriptive use. But some people may argue differently in that case.
 The Ninth -- the Ninth Circuit, as I understand it, did put an initial burden on the trademark-holder to prove confusion. If you look at the petition for cert, 6a, in its opinion, it seems to recognize that the trademark-holder must show that the alleged infringer's use of the mark is likely to cause confusion or to cause mistake or to deceive. So this opinion starts out by saying, "Yes, we know that under the Lanham Act the trademark-holder is obliged to show likelihood of confusion."
 They do it. But then on -- if you look on page 17a of my cert petition, the same opinion, the Ninth Circuit later on go on to say, in the middle paragraph, "As expressed in Kahn's, the fair-use analysis only complements the likelihood of confusion -- likelihood of customer confusion analysis." And then they quote from Transgo, and they say -- explain that "anyone is free to use a term in its primary descriptive sense as long as such use does not result in consumer confusion as to the source of goods." In effect, what they're doing is, they're expanding the rights of trademark-holders of descriptive words. Essentially what they're saying is --
 Well, they go further in that same paragraph, and the last couple of lines refer to a Lindy Pen case, according to -- the way they described, explaining that the fair-use defense is not available if likelihood of confusion has been shown.
 Right, and that's -- that's where they're negating what they said in the beginning of their opinion.
 They do have one authority for that proposition. They cite McCarthy, and I think they're right about that.
 Well, they do cite McCarthy, but I would submit that McCarthy is incorrect, in this case.
 But there is a treatise writer who does take the position that if there's confusion, there's no fair-use defense.
 Well, there are other treatise writers -- Kane, for example, takes the contrary position and says that fair use will always be a defense, even if -even if there is likelihood of confusion.
 So does the -- what is it -- the unfair competition restatement?
 Yes, that takes a similar position, as well, that there can be confusion and fair use at the same time. Again, you have to look at what's causing the confusion. And most often the problem is the confusion is being caused because the person with the words in question is using it as a mark, and that's causing the confusion. If -- there's certain -- there's certain -- there's certain terms and words that Congress has said never get trademark protection. Descriptive words, of course, is one of them, in the sense that they can never get trademark protection in their primary descriptive sense; they only get trademark protection in their -- in their secondary-meaning sense if they can actually prove secondary meaning.
 But I thought we're dealing with an incontestable mark here, and the secondary meaning would be assumed.
 Yes. In the case of an incontestable mark, secondary meaning is presumed; however, that still does not take away the burden of the holder of an incontestable mark of proving likelihood of confusion. And, second, the trademark protection attaches only to the secondary meaning of the mark, never to the primary, descriptive meaning of the words in question. And one other quick example. The laws say you cannot obtain a trademark in the U.S. flag. Now, we have 12 ice-cream manufacturers, they each put the flag on their ice cream. There will be confusion there. Someone will say, "I want the ice cream with the flag on it." But they all have a flag on it. That's another example where Congress said, "We will tolerate confusion." Sometimes we tolerate confusion so we can free up descriptive words so business owners are free to describe their goods to consumers. And, if I may, I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
 Very well, Mr. Machat. Now, Ms. Millett, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Justice Scalia, you asked for an example of a case where there might be confusion, but there would still be a fair use. This Court's decision in William Warner versus Eli Lilly, which was a common-law case cited on page 27 of our brief, gives an example of that. You had Coco-quinine, and Quin-coco being sold. And this Court held, as a matter of the common law fair-use doctrine, that the descriptive -- fair, truthful, descriptive use of a term to describe a product will be permitted even if consumer mistakes result. There are other cases cited in the briefs. Howe Scale is cited in our brief. The Canal Company versus Clark case. The fair-use defense that's at issue here takes its -- has its roots in that common law precedent, and that common law precedent, in origin, speaks directly, Justice O'Connor, to your -- and Justice Kennedy -- to your questions about, what does a fairness component of this test in the statute mean. There is not a general requirement that the -- say, the defendant here; the parties were reversed, but the non-trademark holder acts fairly. That's not what Congress said. It says the term -- and I'm -- and you can see, on page 9a of the statutory appendix to our brief -- the term has to be used fairly and in good faith -- putting that aside, used fairly only to describe the product. That is not some sort of general equitable receptacle for fairness concerns. That focuses on what the defendant did and how they acted in describing. That's not a test of how the public reacted. How did the defendant behave? Which is exactly what William Warner, Canal Company, and Howe Scale also looked at. In common parlance, in a common dictionary meaning, when you talk about fairly describing something, that's not general equity. That is, is it a legitimate, reasonable, proper, objectively apt, and fair way to describe a product. One could reasonably --
 Well, does -- does consumer -- if substantial consumer confusion is shown by the plaintiff, is that enough to defeat a fair-use defense?
 Not by itself, no, Justice O'Connor. Congress told us what will defeat the defense, and that is a -- that is a conclusion that the term is being used as a mark. Consumer confusion might be, if you could explain that that demonstrates that it's being used as a mark. It might show that you're not objectively, reasonably, accurately describing your product. If I describe Twinkies as a sugary snack, that's a -- I can fairly describe Twinkies as a sugary snack. I can't fairly describe Twinkies as a healthy food.
 Suppose, in the Coco-quinine case, the non -- the non-holder is doing just fine without using the particular term, and then he decides, "you know, I'm going to cut into that market, and I'm going to use the term Coco-quinine. And I'm going to do that just in order to get more customers away from the trademark-holder." Is that good faith?
 Yes, because there's nothing, in the marketplace, with wanting to increase your business and to do better and to use descriptive terms descriptively to do that. The good-faith --
 But what --
 -- continued here --
 -- what if he intends to increase his market share precisely by causing the confusion? That would eliminate the good-faith element, wouldn't it?
 The good-faith element is, do I intend -- it depends on what you mean by "causing confusion." If I intend to freeload or ride or exploit the secondary --
 Yeah.
 -- meaning of the term --
 Right.
 -- that's what good faith means in trademark law, generally. It has an established component.
 Right.
 If I intend to do that. But just showing that consumer confusion could result, or that I hope consumers will pause and think about, you know, "what -- what's in the -- what am I now being offered in the marketplace?" But I have to -- if I intend to avail myself of the secondary meaning that you've established of the goodwill that you've generated, that's what good faith goes to. But to use fairly to describe is not a general means of just saying --
 May I ask you --
 -- if there's confusion, that's a bad --
 What does the term "micro color" describe?
 The term "micro color" describes -- this is not my area of expertise, but -- describes, as I understand it, the inks that are used for this permanent make-up process. And the reason it's called "micro color" --
 Does it have a meaning in any context other than describing the -- one party's product in this case?
 I wouldn't begin to know whether other professions or occupations use the term "micro color." But my understanding, from the record, is that the color is obvious. That's -- it's different color inks. And the reason that they use the term "micro" -- and this is on page, I believe, 98 of the first volume of the joint appendix, is that the molecular size of these inks is very, very fine. It's going into the skin. It's micron-size. And so that's, I think, the -- as suggested by petitioner's client -- that that's the origin of the term "micro color." Now, "micro" is a common term that's -- common descriptive term in its own right. It appears in many contexts. Obviously, computers is one that we're all familiar with. Medical devices often will refer to "micro." But "micro color" --
 Wasn't there -- wasn't there something to the effect that "micro pigmentation" is a synonym in the trade for permanent make-up? It's another name for permanent make-up, and it's -- it has "micro" in it, "micro pigmentation."
 That's my understanding, yes.
 "Micro pigmentation" sounds awfully close to "micro color."
 "Micro color," yeah. That's my understanding. Again, I don't really want to weigh in on one side of the dispute or the other on the merits of whether "micro color" is a generic or a --
 Well, you have to weigh in on it. I mean, you have to show that the -- it seems to me, if you think that side should win, that the words are being used in a descriptive sense. And if "micro color" doesn't mean a blessed thing to anybody unless they associate it with the trademark, then, it seems to me, you lose.
 But, Justice Scalia, the problem here is that the Ninth Circuit said that what makes them lose is not that they didn't use this fairly to describe their product, or not that they failed to act in good faith, or not that they were using this as a trademark, but that it was a --
 You're right, that's not the issue in the case.
 Right. Right. And my understanding -- again, the record shows that, in fact, the descriptive use of this was conceded in this case, and that's on page 29a of the petition appendix, and also in the joint appendix on 152.
 You're right.
 But, again, our concern is that this statute has to be read with the terms Congress enacted. Congress drew a balance here. Congress struck the balance between allowing -- giving unprecedented protection that this Court recognized in "Park 'n Fly" to descriptive terms, but policing the line between the secondary meaning that attaches to descriptive terms and the -- reserving for the marketplace, for competition, the availability of descriptive terms in their original descriptive sense.
 In other words, if you choose to use a descriptive term as your logo, you take your chances --
 Exactly.
 -- that that descriptive term will be used fairly and in good faith by somebody else and cause confusion.
 Exactly.
 And if you don't want confusion, pick a term that isn't descriptive.
 That's exactly right. There's a tradeoff. When you pick a descriptive term, you get right up front, right up front, the immediate appeal and resonance of a term to the -- to the consumers. "Best buy." Who wouldn't want the best buy? I want the best buy. "Chunky" candy bars. It's going to be easier to break into the marketplace with "Chunky" candy bars or "Almond Joy" candy bars, because consumers will have a sense of what they're getting, than if you come in with a --
 "Schwartz," "Schwartz" candy bars.
 "Schwartz" candy bar, "Kodak," I don't know
 It doesn't do anything for you. [Laughter.]
 I don't know why that is, and why would I want to eat it. They're going to have to do more work. But the downside, the tradeoff, is, as you said, Justice Scalia, that you do not get to take those terms out of usage. Trademark law protects usage, not words. And if the usage is descriptive, and it's fair, in the sense that it's reasonable, apt, and accurate, as this Court said in William Warner, Canal Company, Howe Scale, in the unfair-competition sense; and the Kellogg versus National Biscuit Company, the Shredded Wheat case, if it's apt and accurate, that's what "used fairly" means. And if its satisfies that objective test, and if it satisfies the subjective good-faith test, and it's not used as a mark, we will tolerate that confusion, because that --
 How do you tell whether it's used as a mark? I mean, is that -- that certainly seems to be central. Is it used as a mark? And if it's used as a mark, then there is a violation.
 The fair-use defense is unavailable if it's used as a mark. There are other --
 Right.
 -- defenses that are available, but the fair-use defense is, by definition, unavailable. That's correct. The way you prove whether something is used as a mark -- there's, sort of, two ways of getting to that end. When something is used as a mark, that means it is signifying to the origin or source of those goods in the marketplace. It's not just describing it, it's telling you who is making it or who is putting it out on the market.
 So let's go back to the use on the brochure of a logo-like -- I mean, as long as they're using just the word "micro color," I see your position entirely, it's used descriptively, not as a mark. But what about when they use something that looks like a mark?
 Well, there's -- there's going to be difficult questions of proof. Our position is that, by taking a descriptive term, you don't get to consign everybody else to ten point Times New Roman font, and that they can do some colorful display, but not a mark.
 Thank you, Ms. Millett. Ms. Brinkmann, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Defendant's - Petitioner's absolute defense is contrary to the text, purpose, structure and history of the fair-use defense of the Lanham Act. In response to Justice Scalia's question about this is the risk that someone takes when they choose a descriptive term, this defense does not apply only to descriptive terms. Under Petitioner's view, this defense would be available to users of arbitrary, fanciful and suggestive marks so long as they were used descriptively and not as a mark. Indeed, our mark here is not --
 How can you use a fanciful term descriptively? I mean, I think that's the definition of an arbitrary or fanciful term, that it doesn't mean anything.
 Well, it may mean something in a different context, I think an example you could use would be the arbitrary trademark of "Apple" for computers. There could be advertising for Computer Electronics, Incorporated in the fall, when there's the back to school rush, using the term "Apple" in a descriptive sense: "Apples for Teachers," you know, the beginning of the year, "Come to our store." So, in reliance on that, you drive two hours because you're the school district director who needs to buy ten new computers to hook into the system. You get there, it turns out they're not Apple Computers.
 No, but do they use the apple as clearly a descriptive term with secondary meaning, that's what gives it protection. But if you have an arbitrary term, as Justice Scalia says, how could that be, how could the defense have any relevance to a fanciful or arbitrary term. And I thought the defense only was relevant when you -- everybody agrees you're talking about descriptive terms?
 No, Your Honor, the Solicitor General does not take that position either, in their brief they recognize that this applies to all level of mark.
 No, but that, all we need to decide this case is to assume that it's descriptive.
 Well, Your Honor, the Ninth Circuit's holding was that it was inherently distinctive, or descriptive, and we maintain that it is suggestive, as was pointed out earlier, this isn't a word that can be found in the English language anywhere, it doesn't describe the pigment or the ink, what it does is suggests the small nature and the fine lines that are ultimately used when this is applied.
 Let's assume that it was descriptive, would the Ninth Circuit test still apply? That you would have to show absence of confusion before you raised the good faith defense?
 We don't believe that's what the Ninth Circuit test does, this was a summary judgment entered against us when we had introduced --
 Well, would you agree, then, that in a case where the mark is descriptive, the non trademark holder, the defendant in the case, can raise the fair-use defense without having to show that there's no confusion?
 Yes, we believe it's the plaintiff's burden, it's clear it's the plaintiff's burden to show likelihood of confusion. The point is, under the district court's absolute rule, notwithstanding evidence in this case of actual confusion, indeed, summary judgment was entered against us because the district court took Petitioner's absolute view that there was no relevance whatsoever to likelihood of confusion to the determination of fair use, that's the rule in the Ninth Circuit overall, and that's what needs to be affirmed.
 Now, I'm confused. I thought the question you're supposed to answer, which is in the blue brief, is whether they have to show an absence of confusion. And I guess now you agree the answer to that question is "no." Is that right, you agree with that?
 Yes.
 Now, that's the end of this case, isn't it? That's what we took it to decide, and that's -- you agree with it and they agree with it, so everybody's happy. We don't even have to write an opinion, we can just --
 I believe the Petitioner came up with that formulation because they had taken on the burden because they were the movant on summary judgment. That's where that misnomer came from.
 Did you object to the formulation of the question presented? Here's the question, "Does the classic fair-use defense to trademark infringement require the party asserting the defense to demonstrate an absence of likelihood of confusion?" That's the question. And you say, "no."
 We agree that the plaintiff, it's clear that under - in the Ninth Circuit - the Ninth Circuit pointed out that, Justice Ginsburg quoted before, made clear that the plaintiff does bear the burden of establishing likelihood of confusion.
 Now, suppose you establish it, maybe we can find some differences here, would you also agree that simply establishing confusion is not enough to overcome the fair-use defense, you'd have to also show that the confusion, along with possibly other things are such that it shows unfairness, or what's the other word, unfairness, or lack of good faith?
 We believe that when Congress --
 You agree with that, or not?
 No, Your Honor, we agree that when Congress wrote the test in 1946, it used the terms "used fairly" to refer to the common law, which included not only the common law of technical trademark, but the common law of unfair competition.
 Good, so now we have something I can disagree with you about. Now, the question would be, why, it's the words are unfair, why, if you just show there's some confusion, which normally there would be, or quite often there would be, why is that enough to overcome their defense that they put here?
 Your Honor, the time that those words were used, the common law, and we respectfully disagree with the Solicitor General's office on the reading of Warner, we'd urge the Court to read that. The reason the Court allowed the use of the term in that case is because they quite clearly said it did not have a secondary meaning. There is no trademark protection for descriptive words with secondary meaning, we are in complete agreement with that. We're dealing with the secondary meaning.
 All right, so now, if we're going to go back into what the Court did, I would say that I was a little disturbed reading this as to why you get protection at all, because I was thinking "micro color," well, that describes very well what it is, it's a tiny, teeny, weenie, weenie bit of color. And when I think of "micro pigment," I think of a farm animal, I think -- I don't know what I think, it's confusing me. So, for an average person, the word "micro color," I thought, "Gee, that's very descriptive of just what it is, a teeny weenie bit of color."
 Well, Your Honor, I would urge you to look at joint appendix pages 137 to 139 where it lists twenty other competitors that sell this very product, they have no cause to use that word. It is not used in the industry as a descriptive term, they're called "pigment," they're called "ink," they're not called "micro colors," that is my client's trademark.
 What's the difference between pigment and color, especially when it's not just "micro color," don't they advertise "micro color red," "micro color grey," so pigment --
 The typical suggestive term, it was created to associate the high quality that my client markets in this product with that term, I want the "micro color" pigments, not the other pigments that are sold by --
 But, what about the word, is it -- am I wrong in what I suggested before, that the word, "micro pigmentation" is used in the trade as a synonym for permanent makeup?
 That's correct, and oftentimes, trademarks are shortened versions of other terminology. The fact is it is suggestive because "micro colors" is the protected trademark here.
 But there is a sense of color in which color is synonymous with pigment. And I assume that's what was accepted here, which leads me to my question, I don't understand why we're having this discussion.
 Exactly.
 Because I thought it was agreed that for purposes of the defense, this was a descriptive use, is that incorrect?
 Yes, Your Honor, for purposes of the defense, it's the other party that has to be using the term differently.
 Well, could you just point to me -- I'm not asking so much about the "why," I just want to know what this case is. Is there someplace in the materials that we've got that indicate that, in fact, you dispute that there is a descriptive use here?
 Yes, footnote 3 of the red brief explains that this purported concession that they discuss about the use of this mark had to do because Justice Ginsburg was distinguishing before, early uses on a bottle, and a flyer, which we dispute occurred, but assuming they occurred, those were descriptive. In 1998 and 1999, Petitioner started using this on their marketing brochures in a very different manner.
 Excuse me, this still goes to the merits of the defense and not to the question presented. The question presented is, descriptive or not descriptive, do you have a defense if it's, if there is consumer confusion? And your position, if you're opposing the question presented, is that if there is consumer confusion, there is no defense. And it's -- I thought that was the only question you were going to discuss here, not in fact whether, if there is such a defense, it has been made out in this case, because these words were or were not descriptive. I mean, that's a --
 Thank you, Your Honor, I'd be happy to discuss that. As I pointed out, it's contrary to the textual language used by the Congress in 1946. They meant "used fairly" to mean what the common law meant. The common law prohibited confusing uses of both technical trademarks and trade names. Moreover, Petitioner's interpretation is contrary to the clear focus of the Lanham Act, which is to prevent customer confusion. The whole point is so that you can walk into a store --
 Ms. Brinkmann, may I stop you there, because I thought you have conceded, as I think you must, I thought you conceded quite clearly, I wrote down that you said, it is the plaintiff's burden to show likelihood of confusion. So, if it's the plaintiff's burden to show likelihood of confusion, how can it be the defendant's burden to show unlikelihood of confusion?
 We don't believe it's the defendant's burden, we believe we -- the district court was correctly reversed by the Ninth Circuit in entering summary judgment against us, notwithstanding the fact that there was dispute regarding likelihood of confusion. And the district court did that, because as I said it was absolutely irrelevant to the determination of used fairly.
 I think this is really quite confusing, Ms. Brinkmann. The question presented, as several people have pointed out, whether the Lanham Act's fair-use defense to trademark infringement requires a party asserting the defense to demonstrate the absence of a likelihood of consumer confusion. Now, do you agree or disagree with that?
 We --
 You can surely answer that, "we agree," or "we don't agree."
 We don't agree. We believe that likelihood of confusion defeats the fair-use defense.
 Okay, okay.
 And we would point out that as a textual argument and the purpose argument --
 May I ask, may I just interrupt, but when would one ever be able to use the defense if the plaintiff makes out a prima facie case, prima facie case, I assume, includes the burden of establishing likelihood of confusion. So, is there any room for the defense at all?
 As we point out in our brief, Your Honor, we do believe that since the amendment in 1988, this has ultimately become a redundancy, but the plaintiff's burden of showing likelihood of confusion --
 So the answer is no.
 It remains as a Congressional emphasis that even if, in a trademark situation, a use that is not likely to confuse is allowed. That is what, this was a --
 It's allowed without the affirmative defense.
 To understand why this came in, it's important to understand in 1946 this defense applied only to incontestable marks. It did not apply to other registered marks. At that time, incontestable mark holders did not have to prove likelihood of confusion. That incontestable mark was a conclusive evidence of the mark holder's exclusive right to use that mark on the same goods. Same mark, on the same goods that were set forth in the affidavit with the PTO. That was akin to early common law. At that point, the plaintiff could go into court with their incontestable mark, and it was conclusive evidence. So there had to be a safety valve for defendants to be able to say, "Okay, I know this is an incontestable mark, I know that, and I know I'm using it on the same goods, but notwithstanding, I can use it because I'm using it fairly, I'm not confusing consumers with this. That's what the purpose was. In 19 --
 But are you suggesting, I want to be sure I follow your thinking, are you saying that in, back in those days, somebody with an incontestable mark did not have to prove likelihood of confusion?
 It was presumed by the weight of that, that was the conclusive evidence.
 Because otherwise, wouldn't that defeat the defense, too, then?
 Because the way Congress structured 1115(b), it was conclusive evidence except subject to the seven specific defenses, this was the fourth one.
 No, but you're saying, isn't your answer to Justice Stevens is that it was a rebuttable presumption?
 Yes.
 Yes.
 Yes, I'm sorry, yes. Yes, Your Honor. I would also point out that when Congress amended in 1988, there's absolutely no evidence whatsoever that they intended to change this and that's what's so fundamental about the position - the district court position. This is a gaping hole in the core purpose of the Lanham Act.
 But suppose IBM had used the word "computers" when they were the only company for ten or fifteen years to mark their product. Now, another company comes along and they produce the same thing, they want to use the word "computer." You're saying that that would be the end of it, they couldn't do it?
 Not at all, Your Honor.
 People would be confused. For a while they'll think that "computer" refers to IBM, there would be confusion, but it's the best word to describe the product, in fact, at least a very good one.
 Your Honor, if that were the case, it was more than likely, almost certainly be a generic term with no protection.
 Well, at the very beginning, IBM was the only one to do it, they didn't have to call it computer, they could have called it a word processor, they could have called it a "think faster." I don't know what they could have called it, but I mean, you know, they chose the word computer.
 And Congress took that explicitly into account when it allowed any mark to be canceled at any time for genericism. Escalator, aspirin are all examples of your situation. That's exactly what happened, and when they came a generic term, that trademark was canceled and it became used as generic. Congress took that into account.
 So what is this fair-use defense for, since you're normally going to show confusion to show the infringement, what's it for, in your opinion?
 Since 1988 it's a vestigial reminder of what Congress wanted to make sure was understood in 1946. Even for the strongest, incontestable mark on the same goods, we are still going to always allow uses that are not likely to confuse.
 But we don't usually interpret statutes that way. I mean, you tell us what Congress had in mind, but our best indication of what Congress had in mind is the words of the statute. And the words of the statute make no sense if they say you have to prove confusion and the only -- however, there's a special defense which you have, which turns out to be there's no confusion, that's not a special defense.
 Two points, Your Honor --
 Makes it a meaningless statute, really.
 Two points. Petitioner gives no meaning to words "used fairly." So if a worst statutory construction --
 I thought they did when they outlined to us what it means is you're using it descriptively, and not as a mark.
 Your Honor, those are other terms that are used in the statute, those are separate requirements. There are four requirements in the provision, used not as a mark, used descriptively, used in good faith, and used fairly. They read "used fairly" right out of the language.
 Ms. Brinkmann, am I right that several cases say, the key here is, are you using it as a mark. Because that suggests you're trying to pawn off your goods as another's. Are you using it as a mark? Or, are you using it, merely descriptively? I thought use as a mark was the key, you're using it as a mark, you're not using it in good faith.
 No, that is one of the factors in likelihood of confusion, that you can take into account, that there can be non-trademark uses that are confusing, but the common law cases we talk about are full of examples of that. I would like to make one other response to Justice Scalia's point, if I could. Justice Scalia, to the extent that you hold that the fair-use defense no longer prohibits, all uses are likely to confuse as unfair, we would look to the suggestion made by the amici that there is a middle ground that likely to confusion, in any event, cannot be completely irrelevant to the used fairly determination, as Petitioner in the district court would have it. We discuss on page 15 of our brief, for example, the Restatement's position, which we would urge the Court to look to, which is akin to what the amici suggests.
 That may well be, but I don't think that's the question presented here. I mean, we could agree with that, that it's relevant to deciding the defense, and still answer the question presented the way that the Petitioner wants.
 The district court's entry of summary judgment must be reversed, the Ninth Circuit did that because of its total disregard for likely to confusion --
 Well, that may be, but the issue here is whether the Ninth Circuit simply went too far in the other direction and required too much. And all we have to determine is whether there is a per se obligation to prove non-confusion. If we do so, that doesn't necessarily reinstate the district court's position, it simply says that the Ninth Circuit went too far, isn't that correct? I mean, that is what is -- that is the issue before us?
 I think the ruling from this Court would have to be that it's not an absolute defense against likelihood of confusion.
 How about if the ruling were a defendant who uses a descriptive term fairly and in good faith to describe its goods or services is not liable for infringement, even if some residual confusion is likely. That's what the Restatement that you've just been applauding says.
 Yes, and that discussion explains a couple of things. It explains that if there is a likelihood of substantial confusion, that would be the outer limit, ordinarily that would not be a fair use. It also points out that likelihood of confusion is relevant to that determination that Your Honor just described. Yes, we would win under that position, Your Honor, that's absolutely correct, that's the middle ground of the Restatement --
 Well, you would win --
 You'd still have to vacate the judgment below, which seemed to go too far in saying that if there is any consumer confusion, that's the end of it.
 Well, Your Honor, we would actually urge the Court to affirm the judgment below, in support of we cite cases in our brief, the Meritor case and the Yakima case, in which the judgment of the Ninth Circuit reversing the district court should be affirmed, and there are other holdings of the Ninth Circuit also that are not before the Court that should be affirmed.
 Well, you're urging then that the Ninth Circuit be affirmed on alternate grounds.
 Yes, Your Honor, that's --
 We rarely do that.
 Yes, Your Honor, I understand that, but in this particular situation --
 Why wouldn't we just vacate it, and you have other grounds that the court below didn't address, but why wouldn't, at the very least, we vacate the judgment and send it back?
 We certainly would agree, Your Honor, that if we are then given an opportunity on remand to go back to summary judgment and carry our burden of establishing a likelihood of confusion, but not have it held against us. For example, in the middle ground, to determine what used fairly is, in addition to likelihood of confusion, we would suggest that there are other factors that the Restatement puts forth. For example, whether there is commercial justification for the use. Did we point out, there is no commercial justification, there are twenty other competitors that don't use this terminology.
 They might have been afraid that you'd sue them.
 That's quite a strong mark, Your Honor.
 Ms. Brinkmann, am I right that they were, "they" being KP, they were in fact using the word "micro color" before you registered your trademark?
 No, we dispute that, Your Honor, they've never produced one bottle from that period. In fact, we introduced four bottles of their --
 But that would be -- that would be a disputed issue of fact.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 And are we making any differentiation at all between the mini color red or whatever, and this logo that appears?
 Yes, all the difference in the world, Your Honor. We maintain that that is a mark use. I mean, the district court rejected that as well, but that is one of the issues where you suggested that courts have resolved these on whether something is used as a mark or not, that is not an easy answer, and that is why it's always part and parcel of the likelihood of confusion. That's the purpose of the Lanham Act, to ensure that when you go into a store, you can buy the products you want. For example, in the health and safety area here, you may be willing to buy a product that costs more money because you know of the quality of them. At the same time, you want to be assured when you go in, because you don't want to buy the one that's recalled all the time, or that has ingredients that cause allergies for you, that's what the Lanham Act is to protect. And it encourages the economic efficiency of the market --
 Your customers are pretty sophisticated people, I guess, they're specialists in an unusual trade, so they're not just like a person walking off the street that doesn't know what it is, they probably know this market pretty well.
 That's directly relevant to the likelihood of confusion, Your Honor. In fact, the typical way of proving that when it ultimately goes to trial is through consumer survey. And the law is clear that that survey would not be of the person on the street, it would be of the appropriate purchasers, who are more sophisticated clinicians and cosmetologists. But, Your Honor, even on that situation in this record, we have direct evidence of confusion. It's at joint appendix page 170, Your Honor, it's the declaration of Gloria Torres, where about 1998, 1999, she was one of the people who did sales, and she started getting calls from people wanting products, and it confused her because they weren't on my client's customer list, and also they were citing different prices. It didn't mean anything to her at the time, it turns out this was the confusion because they were actually seeing this new usage on the marketing brochure by KP Permanent.
 Just out of curiosity, it has nothing to do with the case, do they market this product with color charts, just like paint companies do?
 They do, Your Honor, that's absolutely right, color wheels, color -- and also in the micro pigmentation history, it's very important, because even though it's like tattooing, the purpose is absolutely the opposite, it's to hide the color. So mixing of the colors is a critical component of that industry. I want to make another point about the economic efficiency that is furthered by the trademark laws and not allowing likelihood of confusing uses, which is what Congress intended. By allowing purchasers to know that they're getting the product that they want, they're a lot, able to be more efficient in the market --
 I also -- it's very efficient to allow people to communicate, in English.
 Your Honor, there's nothing to prevent that.
 Well, I guess that's the question, because sometimes people -- I have no doubt --
 Your Honor, I don't think there's anything -- the way that Petitioner passed the Lanham Act grossly overstates it. I mean, I would just submit the following list. The only thing that the Lanham -- the Lanham Act does not allow registration of generic brands, as we mentioned before. It allows cancellation of any mark if it becomes generic. It applies only to commercial uses, not usage in ordinary English language, only in connection with the mark. It can only have a valid trademark when it's actively being used, any mark can be canceled or abandoned after three years. It also, of course, only applies when there's likelihood of confusion. Also there is an expert agency that reviews and goes through a process in which there can be oppositions, objections, all of this could be brought up at that point. And also Congress directly addressed anticompetitive interests when it enacted the statute. It, in 1946, enacted B(7) as a defense for antitrust violations. It also reinforced the Justice Department, and the FTC maintains its enforcement authority, and it also had a particular provision that allowed the FTC to go in and cancel registration. I'd also point out --
 What would be a really expert agency, which you referred to as represented by the government here, and it takes the position quite different from yours.
 At this point in time, Your Honor. I would also point out economic efficiency --
 You say at this point in time? Are you suggesting that it took a different position some other time?
 Your Honor, in this case, it -- this mark has been put through becoming to -- but went through all of the procedures that the PTO required. There's no question that this is a valid mark.
 They're not assailing the validity of the mark.
 Nobody is challenging it, it's the fair-use defense.
 Your Honor, no, what I -- the government's position is the same position that, in fact, it urged before Congress in 1946. The Court's opinion in Park 'n Fly makes this clear. They did not want descriptive terms at all protected, even with secondary meaning. And as the Park 'n Fly opinion makes clear, Congress rejected that and struck the balance this way and included all of these other safeguards, not allowing registration of generic marks, always prohibiting uses that are likely to confuse. We would also point out that that encourages economic efficiencies for businesses as well. By being able to benefit from the reputation of your mark, the business invests more. As soon as confusion is allowed, there is a free rider problem, and that competitor is free riding on that investment. And it's a disincentive for further investment and it undermines the quality of the goods, because the only way --
 Certainly the Restatement and the view of some of the amici is contrary to yours on this.
 We believe that the Restatement and the amici are very consistent in rejecting Petitioner's position and the district court's position that likelihood of confusion is completely irrelevant. We embrace that, I think that's a consistent position, and that would be the bottom line, I would urge, on this Court, because Petitioner's position in the district court wreaks havoc, truly, with the statutory framework that Congress set up and intended. We believe as a matter of strict statutory construction, that indeed it is now a vestigial provision, the fair-use defense, after the 1988 changes to the inconstestability provision. But if the Court is not going to hold that that fair-use defense prohibits uses that are likely to confuse, we would urge the Court to adopt the Restatement position, that the totality of the circumstances, likelihood of confusion is relevant, we think factors that it's confusing in relationship to a health and safety issue would be relevant, the investment by the mark holder could be relevant. And to the extent the competitor had a commercial justification for it, because it was a term that everyone needed to use, but "micro colors" is just not that kind of terminology as the record in this case demonstrates. If there are no further questions, Your Honor.
 Thank you, Ms. Brinkmann. Mr. Machat, you have three minutes remaining.
 Thank you. I'd like to point out that Ms. Brinkmann's reference to the legislative history is incorrect, and I'd just like to refer the Court's attention to my reply brief, pages 14 to 17 where basically it shows that prior to 1988, courts were required to find a likelihood of confusion before finding for the plaintiff on a trademark case. I'd also like to point out that in this particular case, the trademark is not for the word "micro color," the trademark is for the logo mark, and here's some of the confusion. The Respondents were able to obtain a trademark registration for the logo itself, and the strength in the logo itself is not being copied, we're just using the descriptive words within the logo itself. And Congress always intended for descriptive words to be free for everybody to use in their primary descriptive sense, so long as the person, the subsequent user, is not using those descriptive words in the secondary meaning sense, and that's the distinction. The confusion is only an issue to determine whether or not the elements of the fair-use defense is being met, but that confusion should be distinguished from likelihood of confusion. Confusion is a factual determination, likelihood of confusion is a legal determination. So you can use whether or not there is actual confusion to determine whether or not the mark, sorry, the word is being used as a mark.
 I forget your position, if you've taken it, do you agree that the degree of confusion that is predictable or that is likely is one of the elements that can be used to determine whether the use is a fair one? Do you agree or disagree with that?
 I would agree, the degree of confusion, but that comes into whether or not --
 All right, that's all I wanted to know.
 In this case, "used fairly" means, it does mean something, we're saying used fairly refers to whether or not the use is a truthful or reasonably accurate description of the mark. And it always -- truthful is something that the common law always looked at to see, that was a term used, in fact, by this Court in the Warner decision, basically, to quote briefly from that decision, it said "the use of a similar name by another to truthfully describe the same product does not constitute a legal or moral wrong." So I would maintain that "used fairly" means truthful, or can determine whether or not it's exactly true, reasonably accurate. And that would be the meaning of "used fairly." And of course, good faith refers to the intent, and there you have the elements of the fair-use defense. Also, I'd just like to point out once again the Ninth Circuit opinion, it says on the bottom of page 17a, it says, "KP can only benefit from the fair-use defense if there is no likelihood of confusion between KP's use of the term `micro color', and Lasting's mark." And then they go on to say, "as discussed above, because in this case they can be no fair use --"
 Thank you, Mr. Machat, the case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument now in No. 03-633, Donald Roper v. Christopher Simmons. Mr. Layton.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Though bound by Stanford v. Kentucky, the Missouri Supreme Court rejected both its holding and its rationale. This Court should stay the course it set in Stanford, leaving in the hands of legislators a determination as to the precise minimum age for capital punishment within the realm of Thompson v. Oklahoma, and leaving to jurors responsibility for determining the culpability of individual defendants above that minimum age. The Missouri court justified its departure from Stanford on Atkins v. Virginia, but the result it reached is quite different from the result in Stanford. In that -- excuse me -- in Atkins. In that case, the Court was addressing mental ability, itself a component of culpability. The Court announced a principle based on that characteristic, that is, that the mentally retarded are not to be eligible for capital punishment, but then it left to the States the determination of the standard and the means of implementing that principle. The Missouri Supreme Court, by contrast, jumped beyond the question of maturity, which is an element of culpability analysis, to the arbitrary distinction of age. It drew a line based purely on age, which is necessarily over-inclusive, and then it gave that line constitutional status, thus depriving legislators and juries of the ability to evaluate the maturity of 17-year-old defenders.
 Well, we didn't leave it up to the States entirely. I mean, you -- you mean the States could adopt any definition of mental retardation they want?
 No. The States certainly --
 So there's -- there's some minimal level of mental retardation. Right?
 There is some minimal level.
 And isn't that necessarily over-inclusive, just as picking any single age is necessarily over-inclusive?
 No.
 Surely there will be some people who -- who, although they have that level of mental retardation, with regard to the particular crime in question, are deserving of the death penalty.
 I -- I don't agree that it would be over-inclusive, given the Court's analysis in Atkins. The Court said that someone who has that level of mental retardation is simply not sufficiently culpable by definition. That certainly would not be true here. There are 17-year-olds who are equally culpable with those who are 18, 20, 25, or some other age.
 But the age 18 is set even for such things as buying tobacco. The -- the dividing line between people who are members of the community, the adult community, is pervasively 18, to vote, to sit on juries, to serve in the military. Why should it be that someone is death-eligible under the age of 18 but not eligible to be an adult member of the community?
 I think that legislators would be surprised, when they adopted those statutes, that they were affecting their criminal law. In fact, many of those statutes have individualized determinations, the military being one of them. 17-year-olds can enlist. There is an individualized determination, albeit by parents, not the Government. 17-year-olds may be serving in Iraq today. That -- the other kinds of examples that you cite, for example, tobacco --
 But with parental -- they are wards of their parents.
 Yes.
 So their parents -- the same thing with marriage. A 17-year-old can marry but not without parental consent.
 Although in most instances can marry if they go to a court and demonstrate they are sufficiently mature, again contemplating individualized determination, which the Missouri Supreme Court says does not exist as to 17-year-olds with regard to capital punishment.
 Why pick -- why pick on the death penalty? I mean, if you're going to say that somehow people under 18 are juveniles for all purposes, why -- why just pick on the death penalty? Why -- why not say they're immune from any criminal penalty?
 Well, I -- I must assume that if we -- if the Court says they are immune from the -- from capital punishment that someone will come and say they also must be immune from, for example, life without parole.
 I'm sure that -- I'm sure that would follow. I -- I don't see where there's a logical line.
 No. The -- the problem with adopting the -- the 18-year-old line is that it is essentially arbitrary. It's the kind of line that legislators and not courts adopt.
 But didn't -- didn't we adopt a 16-year-old line in our earlier case?
 In -- in Thompson, the Court in a 4-1-4 decision struck a 15-year-old -- a 15-year-old execution, and the States have taken, including Missouri through its General Assembly, have taken that to mean that there is a 16-year-old line. And today, in fact, I think it's true that there is a consensus nationally with regard to the 16-year-old line, not because it has some biological or psychological magic, but because perhaps --
 Well, but -- but there was -- it's about the same consensus that existed in the retardation case.
 Absolutely, that's true. If you look at the -- the --
 And -- and so are we somehow required to at least look at that? I mean, the statistics of how many States have approved 18 years as the line is about the same as those in the retardation case.
 The -- the Court has kind of three groups of cases with regard to the number of States. On one extreme, are Enmund and Coker where you have three and eight States. On the other extreme, are Penry and Stanford where you have 24 and 34 States. And then there's this middle group, which isn't just Atkins and this case. It's also Tison, which is also almost exactly the same number. The Court in Atkins had to find a way of distinguishing Tison, to the extent the Court relied on that -- that counting process, and the -- the Court concluded that there was kind of an inexorable trend with regard to the mentally retarded. We don't have that kind of trend here. In --
 Well, we -- we have a different kind of trend. What do you make -- you spoke of a consensus, but what do you make of the fact that over the last, I guess, 10- or 12-year period, the actual imposition of the death penalty for -- for those whose crimes were -- were under 18 has -- has steadily been dropping. I think 10 years ago, there were 13. Last year, I -- I think the figures were that there were two. The -- the consensus seems to be eroding, and yet as -- as the counsel on the other side pointed out, this has been occurring at a time when -- when treating juvenile crime seriously has not, in fact, been eroding at all. What -- what are we supposed to make of that?
 Well, two things. Number one is that capital sentences have been dropping for all ages, not just for those under 18. So it -- you have to take that into account. The second is that although the last --
 Has -- has the -- has the rate of attrition been the same?
 It is --
 13 to 2 is pretty spectacular.
 It is not --
 I don't think we've seen that, or maybe we have seen that, for -- for death imposition generally. Is that so?
 It is certainly greater, but part of the problem is we're dealing with such small numbers for the -- the juveniles, those under 18, that the difference of one or two makes a huge difference in how the numbers come out. But if you look over the last 10 years, in fact, it has gone up and down and currently is in a down trend, but the down trend --
 Well, it went up once I think, didn't it?
 It -- it went up once within -- since -- since Stanford and then came back down. Now, whether this -- this period in which it comes back down is going to remain that way or whether we'll go back up to where we were 10 years ago I don't know. That's entirely hypothetical to suggest that -- that this very recent trend is more dispositive than the trends over the last 10 years.
 So -- so you're basically --
 You're -- you're basically saying that the -- the time is too short, the numbers are too small --
 Right.
 -- to infer anything.
 Right, and the time is too short on the legislative side as well. We're only talking about the States that have adopted new legislation having done so, one of them in 1999 and the others simply in 2002 and 2004. If we were to look at the history of -- of capital punishment in the United States, there are many times when States have abolished capital punishment and then returned. And Justice --
 You -- you were in the midst of telling us why the -- there is a consensus now that it's inappropriate to execute anyone under 16, and I -- I -- you weren't --
 No. It --
 You couldn't finish that answer. I want to know it.
 Since -- since Stanford, we have had no executions under 16 even though it is possible to read Justice O'Connor's opinion in that case as allowing a State to adopt a statute that specifically says 15. No one has tried that. Everyone seems to have taken Thompson and Stanford together to mean there is a 16-year-old line. Two States have adopted 16 by statute.
 And -- and so you say there's -- there's not so much as a consensus as an understanding of what that decision means.
 I -- I think that that's right. There are States that have adopted it specifically and others have simply implemented it. If I were a prosecutor today, I -- it's hard to imagine that I would -- even in a State where I could find a statute saying I could prosecute someone under age 16, that I would try such a thing.
 Let -- let me ask you this. I -- I don't yet have the -- the record showing the full closing argument of -- of both sides, but we do have the portion where the prosecutor says, isn't this scary? Can adolescence ever be anything but mitigating?
 I -- I don't know how it could be anything but mitigating. But what we have in that --
 But that's not how the prosecution presented it to the jury.
 In that statement, but --
 He said -- he -- he almost made it aggravating. Isn't that scary? I don't have the -- I don't have the full argument.
 No. What -- what he's facing is -- is 18 pages of transcript that occupied the -- the defense counsel's argument. Of those 18 pages, 4 pages are dedicated purely to Mr. Simmons' youth, and throughout the rest of the argument, he uses terms to reinforce that. He refers to him repeatedly as a 17-year-old. He calls him a kid. He does things to reinforce with the jury that he's very young. So then we come back and in a few pages of rebuttal, we have a couple of words -- I shouldn't say that -- two sentences in which the prosecutor is trying to respond to that particular lengthy theme and argument.
 It was pretty clear. The -- the words in question were: Think about age. 17 years old. Isn't that scary? Doesn't that scare you? Mitigating? Quite the contrary I submit. Quite the contrary.
 And if we were here because Mr. Simmons said that was improper and the Missouri Supreme Court said that was improper, well, we wouldn't be here. We wouldn't have asked for certiorari. The Court wouldn't have granted it.
 But the question is, can -- is -- is age, youth inevitably mitigating, and here is a prosecutor giving the answer no, it can be aggravating.
 The Missouri statute requires that an instruction be given that says that age is a mitigator, and the -- the instruction was given here. And the jury heard argument concerning that particular claim.
 Well, what's -- what's the --
 Well, that's somewhat --
 What is the contrary of -- of mitigating? I -- I would assume --
 Aggravating, but aggravating --
 Is it? I -- I would assume it's not mitigating.
 Well, you're right, Your Honor, because --
 Maybe the opposite of mitigating is aggravating, but it -- it's perfectly good English to say, mitigating? Quite the contrary --
 It is --
 It's not at all mitigating.
 Yes. And -- and --
 So I don't know why you give that one away.
 Certainly aggravating circumstances are defined in the Missouri statute, and they were defined in the instructions. So this was not to be considered by the jury as an aggravator.
 Let -- let's focus on the word unusual. Forget cruel for the moment, although they're both obviously involved. We've seen very substantial demonstration that world opinion is -- is against this, at least as interpreted by the leaders of the European Union. Does that have a bearing on what's unusual? Suppose it were shown that the United States were one of the very, very few countries that executed juveniles, and that's true. Does that have a bearing on whether or not it's unusual?
 No more than if we were one of the very few countries that didn't do this. It would bear on the question of unusual. The decision as to the Eighth Amendment should not be based on what happens in the rest of the world. It needs to be based on the mores of -- of American society.
 Have the countries of the European Union abolished the death penalty by popular vote?
 I don't know how they've done that, Your Honor.
 I thought they did it by reason of a judgment of a court --
 Well, in fact --
 -- which required all of them to abolish it.
 I -- I believe that --
 And I thought that some of the public opinion polls in -- in a number of the countries support the death penalty.
 I believe that there are countries in Europe who abolish it because of their membership in the European Union --
 I -- I acknowledged that in -- in my question. I recognize it is the leadership in many of these countries that objects to it. But let us -- let us assume that it's an accepted practice in most countries of the world not to execute a juvenile for moral reasons. That has no bearing on whether or not what we're doing is unusual?
 I -- I can't concede that it does because it's unimaginable to me that we would be willing to accept the alternative, the flip side of that argument. It does seem to me, however, that that goes to a particular -- back to the aspect where I began --
 Is there -- is there any on -- on that? Is there any indication? I mean, I've never seen any either way, to tell you the truth, but -- that Madison or Jefferson or whoever, when they were writing the Constitution, would have thought what happened elsewhere, let's say, in Britain or in the British -- they were a British colony. They did think Blackstone was relevant. Did any -- that they would have thought it was totally irrelevant what happened elsewhere in the world to the word unusual. Is there any indication in any debate or any of the ratification conventions?
 Nothing that I have seen has suggested that --
 So if Lincoln --
 -- one way or the other.
 -- Abraham Lincoln used to study Blackstone and I think he thought that the Founding Fathers studied Blackstone, and all that happened in England was relevant, is there some special reason why what happens abroad would not be relevant here? Relevant.
 There's a --
 I'm not saying controlling.
 There's a special reason why Blackstone would be relevant because that was the law from which they were operating when they put this language into the Constitution.
 Absolutely, and they, I guess, were looking at English practices, and would they have thought it was wrong to look abroad as a relevant feature?
 And -- and I don't know the answer to that, Your Honor.
 Do we -- do we ever take the position that what we do here should influence what people think elsewhere?
 I -- I have not seen that overtly in any of the Court's opinions, Your Honor.
 You -- you think --
 You -- you thought that Mr. Jefferson thought that what we did here had no bearing on the rest of the world?
 Oh, I -- I think Mr. Jefferson thought that. I think many of the Founders thought that they were leading the world, and I have no objection to us leading the world, but Mr. Jefferson's lead of the world was through the legislature not through the courts.
 But did he not also say that to -- to lead the world, we would have to show a decent respect for the opinions of mankind?
 That -- that may well be.
 What did John Adams think of the French? (Laughter.)
 I read a biography of John Adams recently. I recall that he didn't think highly of them. (Laughter.)
 The -- Missouri, in order to implement the principle that those who are immature should not be subject to capital punishment, has adopted an approach that, first off, excludes anyone age 16 and under from capital punishment; second, requires certification by the juvenile court for anyone who is 16, but otherwise turns the matter over to the jury and defines it as a statutory mitigator. The kind of evidence that is discussed in Mr. Simmons' brief at some length could have been applied -- could have been presented during the penalty phase of Mr. Simmons' trial. It has been reflected in decisions of this Court as far back as Eddings where there was evidence of mental and emotional development. In Penry, there was evidence of mental age and social maturity. And here, in the post-conviction proceeding, Mr. Simmons presented such evidence regarding his impulsivity, his susceptibility to peer pressure, and his immaturity. But he didn't present that at trial. There is a mechanism in Missouri for him to do that and he chose not to.
 Before you go off on this, the one statistic that interested me -- and I'd like you to discuss its relevance really -- is if we look back 10 years, I have only three States executing a juvenile: Texas, 11; Virginia, 3; and Oklahoma, 2.
 Correct.
 And those three States account for about 11 percent of the population of the country, 11.3 percent. Now, if we go back a few more years to Stanford, we get three others in there: Louisiana, 1; Georgia, 1; and Missouri, 1.
 And if you go to the convictions rather than the executions, then Alabama goes into that mix.
 We have a very different number.
 Right.
 So the reason that I thought arguably it's more relevant to look at the convictions is there are a lot of States. Say, New Hampshire, I think, for example -- when I was in the First Circuit, there were several States that on the books permitted the death penalty, but nobody ever had ever been executed. And -- and that's true across the country. There are a number of States like that. So if we look at the States that actually execute people, it's 10 years, say, 11 percent of the population are in such States. You go back 15 years, and you get these three other States, which raises the percentage. How -- how should I understand that? I'm interested in both sides --
 Frankly, we don't know what those numbers mean because we don't know to what extent juveniles are committing capital level murders. We -- and there is no way in current social science to make that determination. It's interesting that among the three States -- two of the three States that are on that list that Justice Breyer mentioned are States in which there is a specific instruction to the jury, or indeed, in Texas, a requirement, that the jury evaluate future dangerousness. That is, the argument that was referred to by opposing -- or that counsel made, the State's counsel made, the prosecutor made, in the -- in the trial here, there's actually an instruction in some of those States. And that may play into the manner in which this -- those States -- the reason those States have additional convictions and additional executions. But Missouri doesn't have that. We don't require that the jury find future dangerousness, and although that may come up in the course of a mitigation and aggravation argument in the penalty phase, it isn't highlighted like it is in those States. And that may be more problematic than the system that Missouri has created. If the kind of evidence, psychosocial evidence, that is cited in Mr. Simmons' brief had been presented at the penalty phase, of course there would have been an opportunity to rebut it, to question it. Instead, what we have in this case is the marshaling of untested evidence from various cause groups and some dispassionate observers.
 At what point was this inserted into the record, Mr. Layton?
 The -- the kind of -- well, as to Mr. Simmons specifically, it came in in the post conviction proceeding, and then was also present in the habeas record. In this case, the -- the lengthy litany of scientific studies appeared for the first time in his brief in this Court. There were references to a few of them before, but nothing --
 It was never -- never tested in the trial court.
 Oh, no. Oh, no, because he never made the argument in the trial court during his trial that -- that scientifically he was too immature to be culpable to the degree that would merit capital punishment.
 Well, at least to the extent that he's simply quoting public sources, you had a chance to quote public sources in -- in return.
 Absolutely.
 So I think you're -- you're even on that --
 Absolutely.
 -- or at least your opportunity is.
 I -- and I think the reason that we did that and we cited the difficulties in our reply brief with what he cited is to highlight that the precise age is a legislative question based on legislative type facts. Legislatures can evaluate this series of studies and then pick what is essentially an arbitrary age. There is no study in anything that Mr. Simmons cites that -- that justifies that particular day, 18. They talk about adolescence. They talk about young adolescence, old adolescence. They talk about adolescence continuing until the mid-20's. Nothing justifies the age of 18. That makes it the kind of fact that a legislature ought to be evaluating, not a court.
 Does adolescence as a scientific term -- does it always occur on the same day for -- for all individuals?
 No. The -- the studies point out that adolescence is -- well, they don't agree on what adolescence means, and they don't -- and they point out that it begins and ends on different times for different people. So we don't know what adolescence means in the studies, and we don't know what it would mean were the Court to base a decision on the -- this concept of adolescence. I'd like to reserve the rest of my time, if there are no other questions.
 Very well, Mr. Layton. Mr. Waxman, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Everyone agrees that there is some age below which juveniles can't be subjected to the death penalty. The question here is where our society's evolving standards of decency now draw that line. 15 years ago, this Court found insufficient evidence to justify a bright line at 18, but since Stanford, a consensus has evolved and new scientific evidence has emerged, and these developments change the constitutional calculus for much the same reasons the Court found compelling in Atkins. As was noted --
 Can the constitutional calculus ever move in the other direction? I mean, once we hold that, you know, 16 is the age, if there's new scientific evidence that shows that some people are quite mature at 18 or at -- at 17-and-a-half or if -- if there is a -- a new feeling among the people that youthful murderers are, indeed, a serious problem and -- and deterrence is necessary, can we ever go back?
 Well, there is a --
 It's sort of a one-way ratchet. Isn't it?
 There is a one-way ratchet here as there is whenever this Court draws a constitutional line; that is, whenever this Court determines that the Constitution preempts the ability of legislatures to make --
 Well, but what -- what if a State legislature decides that, sure, the Supreme Court said in the Simmons case that you can't execute anybody under 18, but we think there's kind of a tendency the other way, we're going to pass a statute and see what happens in court?
 Well, you could -- you could have, I guess, what I refer to as the Dickerson v. United States phenomenon. It could come up. But what's -- what's really interesting -- I think what's --
 Is it -- is that a closed book? I mean, granted, you may lose the argument, but is it a permissible argument that the standards have evolved the other way?
 It -- it certainly would be a permissible -- permissible argument. What's -- what's notable here, Justice Scalia and Mr. Chief Justice, is how robust this consensus is. We're talking not only about the whole variety of ways in which our society has concluded that 18 is the bright line between childhood and adulthood and that 18 is the line below which we preserve -- presume immaturity. But the line with respect to executions, the trend is very robust and it is very deep.
 We don't -- we don't use 18 for everything. Aren't there States that -- that allow adolescents to drive at the age of 16?
 There are nine States that allow adolescents to drive at the age of 16 without their parents' consent. That -- driving, of course, is the classic example, but --
 With their parents' consent --
 Right.
 With their parents' consent, how many?
 To -- to -- there are 41 States that require parental consent below 18.
 But they can drive.
 But they can drive if their parents agree. My -- my --
 If it's okay with the parents, it's okay with the State.
 My point here is that with respect to the death penalty, we have a substantial consensus within the United States, as it happens, exactly the same lineup as existed in -- as existed in -- was true in Atkins. We have not just a worldwide consensus that represents the better view in Europe. There are 194 countries --
 Well, how does one -- how does one determine what is the better view?
 I was -- I was referring to the implication that it has often been said that because the European Union thinks something, we should, therefore, presume that the world views it that way. We're now talking about --
 Are you suggesting that we adopt that principle?
 To the contrary. My point is we are not talking about just what a particular European treaty requires. We -- the -- the eight States that -- that theoretically -- that have statutes that theoretically permit execution of offenders under 18 are not only alone in this country, they are alone in the world. Every country in the world, including China and Nigeria and Saudi Arabia and the -- and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, every one has agreed formally and legislatively to renounce this punishment, and the only country besides the United States that has not is Somalia, which as this Court was reminded yesterday, has no organized government. It is incapable --
 They have a lot of customs that we don't have. They don't allow most -- almost all of them do not allow -- have trial by jury. Should we -- and they think it's not only more efficient, it is fairer because juries are, you know, unpredictable and whatnot. Should we yield to the views of the rest of the world?
 Of course not, but this is a -- this is a standard which -- a constitutional test that looks to evolving standards of moral decency that go to human dignity. And in that regard, it is -- it is notable that we are literally alone in the world even though 110 countries in the world permit capital punishment for one purpose -- for one crime or another, and yet every one -- every one formally renounces it for juvenile offenders. And, Justice Kennedy, my submission isn't that that that's set -- you know, game, set, and match. It's just relevant, and I think it is relevant in terms of the existence of a consensus. There was reference made by my opponent to the fact that there are four States that set the age at 17 and four States that set the age at 16. No -- in terms of movement, no one has suggested that any of those States or any other State has ever lowered the age. In fact, if you look at those particular -- those eight States, a number of them legislated an age that represented raising the number over what had previously been permitted. The movement, as this Court addressed, talked about in Atkins, has all been in one direction, and it's not as if that movement, in and of itself, answers the question. But where you have the type of consensus that exists here, as it did in Atkins, and where you have a scientific community that in Stanford was absent -- the American Medical Association, the American Psychological Association, the American Psychiatric Association, the major medical and scientific associations, were not able in 1989, based on the evidence, to come to this Court and say there is scientific, empirical validation for requiring that the line be set at 18.
 Well, in fact, the American Psychological Association is not your brief. You're not accountable for inconsistencies there. But I -- I would like your comment. They came to us in Hodgson v. Minnesota, as I think the State quite correctly points out, and said that with reference to the age for determining whether the child could have an abortion without parental consent, that adults -- that they -- that they were risk -- that they could assess risk, that they had rational capacity, and they completely flip-flop in this case.
 Well --
 Is that just because of -- is that just because of this modern evidence?
 No, no, no. I don't -- I think it's -- it may be in small part to that, Justice Kennedy, but I think the main point is that what their brief looked to -- what the argument was was our -- are adolescents cognitively different than adults. And the answer is, as we -- our brief concedes, is generally no. And what was at issue in the abortion cases was competency to decide. And just as we allow the mentally retarded the ability to decide whether or not to obtain an abortion but not to be subject to a penalty that is reserved for the tiny fraction of murderers that are so depraved that we call them the worst of the worst, here competency to decide here, as with the mentally retarded, isn't the issue. Christopher Simmons was found, beyond a reasonable doubt, to have committed this offense with the specific intent necessary to do it, just as the mentally retarded can be. The issue in Hodgson was cognitive ability to be able to make a competent decision. And so I don't -- I didn't represent the APA then and I don't now, but I don't, with respect, think there's an inconsistency. In fact, the difference here goes to the factors that Atkins identified about why overwhelmingly the mentally retarded -- and here adolescents -- are less morally capable. They are much, much less likely to be sufficiently mature to be among the worst of the worst. And here, even more than with the mentally retarded, the few 16- and 17-year-olds who might, if we could even determine it, be -- we could determine were in fact so depraved that they were among the worst of the worst, there is no way reliably to identify them and there's no way reliably to exclude them. And it is in this respect that science I think changes. At the time of Stanford, everybody on this Court, of course, knew what all of us as adults intuitively know, which is that adolescents -- and -- and here we're talking about -- I agree that when adolescence starts and when it ends is undefined. But every scientific and medical journal and study acknowledges that 16- and 17-year-olds are the heartland. No one excludes them. And what we know from the science essentially explains and validates the consensus that society has already developed.
 If all of this is so clear, why can't the State legislature take it into account?
 Well, one could have said --
 I mean, if it's such an overwhelming case that -- that we can prescribe it for the whole country, you would expect that the number of States that -- that now permit it would not permit it. All you have to do is bring these facts to the attention of the legislature, and they can investigate the accuracy of the studies that the American Psychological Association does or other associations in a manner that we can't. We just have to read whatever you put in front of us.
 Justice Scalia, the number of States that engage in these executions is very small, and if it were all of the States, none of this Court's Eighth Amendment jurisprudence would ever have to come -- would ever have to be developed. But --
 But that's precisely because the jury considers youthfulness as one of the mitigating factors. It doesn't surprise me that the death penalty for 16- to 18-year-olds is rarely imposed. I would expect it would be. But it -- it's a question of whether you leave it to the jury to evaluate the person's youth and take that into account or whether you adopt a hard rule that nobody who is under 18 is -- is -- has committed such a heinous crime with such intent that he -- that he deserves the death penalty.
 Justice -- Justice Scalia, there's no doubt -- and the jury was instructed -- that age is a mitigating factor although, Justice Kennedy, in response to your question, our brief points out prosecutors, in the context of future dangerousness, which is relevant, argue it all the time and jurors intuitively think it all the time. But the fact that he could have made an individualized mitigating case or argued that he was only -- that he was young, as he did, doesn't address the constitutional problem. The constitutional problem is that overwhelmingly 16- and 17-year-olds, for reasons of the -- the developmental reasons relating to their psychosocial character --
 Well, Mr. Waxman, was that in evidence that you referred to from these various associations? Was that introduced at trial?
 The -- about the character --
 Yes.
 No. The trial was -- I'm making an observation just as in -- as in Atkins --
 Well, but I -- I would think if you want to rely on evidence like that, it ought to be introduced at trial and subject to cross examination rather than just put in amicus briefs.
 Oh, no, Mr. Chief Justice. I'm not making an argument about the character or maturity of this defendant, which would have been the only thing that would be --
 No. But you're making an argument that science says people this age are simply different, and it seems to me you -- if that's to be an argument, it ought to be introduced at trial.
 I -- I -- it's an argument about what the Constitution prohibits. It's an argument about where a constitutional line should be drawn.
 Well, but you're -- you're talking facts basically and facts ordinarily are adduced at trial for cross examination.
 Well, I am not aware of any instance in which legislative facts, as you will call them, that is, facts that go to where a line should be drawn, whether it's by this Court because the Constitution ought to be so interpreted or a legislation should change, would be properly introduced to a jury that is supposed to accept the law, that has required to accept the law as is given by a judge --
 Well, how about in the -- how about in the habeas proceeding?
 In the habeas proceeding, it's -- it's -- an argument could have been made and, indeed, was made in this case that the line -- that under Atkins juvenile offenders are the same and --
 Well, was this evidence adduced at the habeas proceeding?
 The habeas -- if you're talking about the -- the scientific studies --
 Right.
 -- in peer-reviewed journals, it was not.
 Well -- well, surely at the trial, you could have had a psychiatrist testify to all the things that are in your -- in your brief, and in fact the -- it would be another argument, but maybe the -- maybe the finding was deficient on that ground as well.
 Well, we certainly could have had a psychiatrist argue that in -- generally speaking, adolescents are less mature and on a range of psychosocial factors, they --
 Well, he could have cited all the -- all the authorities you cite in your brief.
 Right. But, Justice Kennedy, I -- I concede that. The issue for this Court is whether the Constitution requires that as a matter of law, not as a matter of the application of law to a particular defendant, the line has to be drawn this way, and --
 Suppose -- suppose that all of the things set forth in your brief were eloquently set forth by a psychiatrist to the jury. Could the jury then weigh these things that you're telling us?
 The jury could have weighed these things, but there is no way, even for a psychiatrist or a psychologist, much less a juror to -- to be confident because of the inherent, documented transiency of the adolescent personality. No psychiatrist and no juror can say with confidence that the crime that was committed by a 16- or 17-year-old, on the average 2 years ago -- and this is the key point -- proceeded from enduring qualities of that person's character as opposed to the transient aspects of youth, and therefore --
 But now, that -- that itself is a purported scientific fact, what you just said, and it seems to me if we're -- if we're to rely on that, it ought to have been tested in the way most facts are.
 What the jury -- perhaps I'm not understanding your point.
 Well, you're -- you're relying on factual -- the statement you just made was -- was a factual statement about the enduring character, et cetera. Now, if -- if we are to take that as a fact, it ought to have been tested somewhere rather than just given to us in a brief.
 Well, the -- the -- an argument to the jury that regardless of what a psychiatrist or a psychologist would have said about Christopher Simmons, as a group, 16- and 17-year-olds have such labile personalities that it is impossible to know whether they're -- the crime that they committed reflected an enduring character is an argument that could have been made to spare this particular defendant, but it need not have been credited or given dispositive weight, particularly since at sentencing -- and this Court has acknowledged this in cases like Pate v. Robinson and Drope v. Illinois -- the jury is evaluating somebody, determining their moral blameworthiness 2 years later.
 But -- but if you're reluctant to give it dispositive weight in an individual case, then you come in and ask us to give it dispositive weight as a general rule, that seems to me inconsistent.
 Well, no. What I'm -- what I'm asking you to do -- what I'm suggesting is that the weight of scientific and medical evidence of which the Court can take judicial notice and should take judicial notice and did take judicial notice in cases like Atkins and Thompson and Stanford explains and validates the consensus that society has drawn. We're not arguing that the science or what a particular neurobiologist or developmental psychologist says dictates the line of 18. The question is we have a consensus. It's even more robust than it was in Atkins. Looking at proportionality and reliability with respect to that consensus, is there a good, objective, scientific reason to credit the line that society has drawn? And I'm suggesting two things. Number one, that although one could posit that there are 16- and 17-year-olds whose antisocial traits are characterological rather than transient, we know it is impossible -- we know this from common sense and it's been validated by science, of which the Court can take note, that it is impossible to know whether the crime that was committed by a 16- or 17 year-old is a reflection of his true, enduring character or whether it's a manifestation of traits that are exhibited during adolescence. And --
 Well, suppose -- suppose I -- I were not convinced about your scientific evidence was conclusive and I don't identify a clear consensus. Do you lose the case, or can you then make the same argument you just made appealing to some other more fundamental principle that Stanford was just wrong?
 Here -- no. Well -- no. Here's what I would appeal to. I -- there are three relevant factors that this Court has to look at. There's the determination of consensus. Is there enough of a one or isn't there? There's the determination of proportionality, and then there's the issue identified in Lockett and in Atkins, which is how reliable is the individualized sentencing process. How reliably -- when we're talking about picking the tiny few who are the worst of the worst, how reliably can we do that? We think that with respect to each of those, we have demonstrated that the Eighth Amendment requires recognizing 18. But I will take as a posit your hypothetical question that I haven't convinced you on number one, number two, or perhaps individually on all three. This is truly a case, Justice Kennedy, in which the whole is greater than the sum of the parts. Taken together, the fact that it's impossible for a jury to know whether the crime of an adolescent was really the feature of an enduring character, since we know, as in Atkins, that many of the characteristics that manifest themselves in mental retardation also affect the inability of adolescents to communicate with their attorneys, to express remorse, that 2 years later when this person is on trial, physically, emotionally it's not the same person that the jury is looking at and being asked to evaluate --
 So that -- that's -- that last point was what I thought the scientific evidence was getting at, that it simply confirmed what common sense suggests, that when you execute a person 15 or sometimes 20 years later, a problem always is that that person isn't the same person who committed the trial in a meaningful sense. And it's specially true of 16- and 17 year-olds who, observation would suggest, have a lot of changing to do because their personality is not fully formed. Now, I thought that the -- the scientific evidence simply corroborated something that every parent already knows, and if it's more than that, I would like to know what more.
 Well, it's -- I think it's -- it's more than that in a couple of respects. It -- it explains, corroborates, and validates what we sort of intuitively know, not just as parents but in adults that -- that -- who live in a world filled with adolescents. And -- and the very fact that science -- and I'm not just talking about social science here, but the important neurobiological science that has now shown that these adolescents are -- their character is not hard-wired. It's why, for example -- here's a -- here's an interesting and relevant scientific fact. Psychiatrists under the DSM, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, which is their Bible, are precluded from making a diagnosis of antisocial personality before the age of 18 precisely because before the age of 18, personality and character are not fixed even with respect to --
 Mr. Waxman, I -- I thought we punish people, criminals, for what they were, not for what they are. I mean, you know, if you have someone who commits a heinous crime and by the time he's brought to trial and convicted, he's come to Jesus, we don't let him off because he's not now what he was then. It seems to me we punish people for what they were.
 We --
 And to say that adolescents change, everybody changes, but that doesn't justify eliminating the -- the proper punishments that society has determined.
 I think, with respect, Justice Scalia, I'm not -- I think that there is an interesting question about -- with respect to death, whether what they are and what they will become is totally irrelevant. But accepting the premise of your question, my point is that science has confirmed what we intuitively know, which is that when the jury gets around to evaluating what the character was that manifested that horrible crime, they can't tell because of the passage of age and because of a number of confounding factors and because psychologists and psychiatrists can't tell themselves whether the crime that occurred 2 years ago or 2 weeks ago was the manifestation of an enduring character or transient psychosocial traits that rage in adolescence.
 Is part of your answer based on the length of time between the killing and the trial?
 Only part, Mr. Chief Justice. Part of it is that the jury, of course, is looking at the defendant, and we have laid before the Court peer-reviewed scientific studies that show that they -- that people are -- frequently equate maturity and psychosocial development with race and with physical appearance. In addition, because the adolescent personality is transient and the lapse of time for trial is 2 years, in a very real sense psychosocially as opposed to -- in addition to physically, the person that the jury is judging is not the -- is not a manifestation of the person who committed the crime.
 Well, what if -- what if a State said I see the problem, so we'll bring this person to trial in 6 weeks?
 Even if it were in 6 weeks, Mr. Chief Justice, we believe that the process is -- is sufficiently -- that would just make the youth the same as the mentally retarded, because the mentally retarded have stable personalities and stable characters, and yet, what this Court said in Atkins was we have two things to say. One is that overwhelmingly as a group the mentally retarded are unlikely to be among the very worst of the worst, and the very deficits that they have -- that you called deficits in reasoning, judgment, and control of their impulses, makes the jury -- the process of the jury evaluating the moral culpability, the moral blameworthiness unreliable. And it's on the basis of those two things that we think that the consensus that's otherwise reflected is validated. And here --
 I have -- I have one other question I'd like to ask because it's been troubling me and I want your comment. A number of juveniles run in gangs and a number of the gang members are over 18. If we ruled in your favor and this decision was given wide publicity, wouldn't that make 16-, 17-year-olds subject to being persuaded to be the hit men for the gangs?
 Well --
 I'm -- I'm very concerned about that.
 I -- I am also concerned about it, and I -- I have thought about this. First of all, if they are enlisted by people over the age of 18 to do that, the -- the precise degree of culpability goes to the people who are over 18, and juries ought to consider whether people who are over the age of 18 have so enlisted them. But even -- but with respect to --
 I'm talking about the deterrent value of the existing rule insofar as the 16 and 17-year-old. If -- if we rule against you, then the deterrent remains.
 Well, I think -- I think, as with the mentally retarded, or in fact, even more than with the mentally retarded, adolescents -- the -- the role of deterrence has even less to say, precisely because they weigh risks differently and they don't see the future and they are impulsive and they're subject to peer pressure. And in fact, if you look at what happened in this case, it's as good an example as any. The State says, well, okay, you know, he -- you know, this guy, according to the State's witness, the person, who was over 18 and described as the Fagin of this group of juveniles, testified to the court, well, Christopher Simmons says, let's do it because, quote, we can get away with it.
 Well, there were a number -- a number of cases in the Alabama amicus brief, which is chilling reading -- and I wish that all the people that sign on to the amicus briefs had at least read that before they sign on to them -- indicates that often the 17-year-old is the ringleader.
 Well, the 17-year-old may be the ringleader, and even if you posit that Christopher Simmons was the ringleader here, he -- he wasn't under any illusions. He wasn't making a statement about being executed. He said, we could get away with it, which speaks volumes about the -- the extent to which -- this guy was subject to life without parole, which is, Justice Scalia, fundamentally different than death. This Court has said that only when the penalty is death, do you look at the character of the defendant as opposed to the nature of the crime and the act. But the data shows -- and I think this Court has acknowledged -- it acknowledged in Thompson in any event -- that the -- that adolescents like the -- the mentally retarded are much less likely to be deterred by the prospect of an uncertain, even if probable, very substantial penalty. The -- no mature adult would have thought, as Chris Simmons reportedly said, I can get away with this because I'm 17 years old, when the mandatory punishment for him would have been life in prison. It's -- it is not -- eliminating the death penalty as an option, which is -- which is imposed so rarely as to be more freakish than the death penalty was in Furman -- three States in the last 10 years, one --
 But of course, the death penalty was not a deterrent for any of the crimes described in the Alabama brief because those are all -- crimes all occurred in States which execute people under 18.
 Yes, and I -- and I -- the -- the examples in the Alabama brief are horrifying. But if you look at those examples, the very first one, this is a kid who went on a killing spree, including his father, because he felt he was unjustly deprived use of the family truck. And there -- I can go through the other examples, but these are posited as people who a jury could, with a degree of reliability that the Constitution requires, say acted out of a stable, enduring character rather than transient aspects of youth? I think that's a poster child for us.
 Whereas if it had been done by an 18-year-old, a jury could have said that.
 Well --
 If an 18-year-old did the same thing, you say, well, he's certainly stable.
 May I answer? Briefly. The line -- the science shows what common sense understands which is that development is a continuum, but the line, 18, is one that has been drawn by society.
 Thank you, Mr. Waxman.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Layton, you have 8 minutes remaining.
 Mr. Simmons, of course, was found by the jury to be the ringleader. And in essence, that creates a contrast with the Lee Malvo case where we had something like what Justice Kennedy referred to, adults influencing a juvenile, and the jury was able to make that distinction in the Virginia Lee Malvo case.
 May I ask this question, Mr. Layton? This case kind of raises a question about the basic State interests that are involved here, and the State interests that justify the death penalty include deterrence and also retribution.
 Yes.
 Which, if either, of those do you think is the primary State interest you seek to vindicate today?
 I -- I think that they are of equal weight in the minds of the legislators in the State of Missouri. The -- Mr. Simmons' counsel comes to the edge of asking this Court to --
 May I just ask one further?
 Yes.
 Is there any evidence that the death penalty for those under 18 or even above has, in fact, had any deterrent value?
 From all that I have read, the evidence both directions is inconclusive, Your Honor, and thus, subject to legislators' determination. Mr. Simmons' counsel comes to the edge of asking the Court to elevate proportionality to be equivalent to -- to a consensus. But let me just highlight two aspects of the non-capital case proportionality jurisprudence of this Court. Justice Kennedy, in -- in Harmelin recently cited by the plurality in Ewing, pointed out that two of the considerations in proportionality review in those instances are the primacy of the legislature and the nature of the Federal system. What we should have here is a principle that is a principle dealing with immaturity, and the States, within the Federal system, should be able to make the determination as to how to implement it. As pointed out, this Court's jurisprudence in Eighth Amendment areas has proven to be a one-way ratchet, and because of that, the Court has to be very wary of leading rather than reflecting societal norms. Now, there are some States, of course, that have raised the age, the minimum age, for capital punishment, but at least in some instances, such as Missouri, that is a reaction to this Court's jurisprudence, that is, a reaction to Thompson and Stanford. Other States have left 18 for other purposes, and yet there still is a role by this Court. Pornography is an example. I am confident that but for this Court's First Amendment jurisprudence, the Missouri General Assembly would adopt a statute that said that pornography should not be allowed at ages much higher than 18 and not because of maturity, but because of their opposition to pornography. In many of the instances cited by Mr. Simmons, the kind of statutes that he cites, gambling and others, it is a compromise in the legislative arena, not necessarily based on maturity or immaturity, that leads to the selection of the age of 18. Many States have, of course, individualized determinations with regard to those statutes. There was a discussion of driver's licenses. In Missouri, of course, we allow people to drive at age 15. They have to have parental consent, yes, but there also is a test. That is, there is an individualized determination before we do that, and that's what the State requests here. Mr. Simmons' counsel points out that in Atkins the Court took judicial notice of psychosocial evidence, and that's true. The Court did. But remember that what the Court had before it in Atkins was not a proxy for a -- a factor that plays into culpability. It was, in fact, the factor itself, that is mental capacity. And what they want here is not a determination as to the maturity or the capacity of individuals. They want a bright line test that is based purely on age. This Court should adopt, as it did in Atkins, a principle and leave it to the States to act. That's what the Court did in --
 Of course, one -- one of the objections in -- in Atkins was we needed a bright line test. We'd have difficulty determining which ones are mentally retarded. Here we don't have that problem at all. I guess everybody knows whether or not the defendant is over or under 18.
 Well, if that's the bright line. We don't know whether they're mature or immature, and we have to measure that somehow.
 But the -- but the purpose of a bright line test is to avoid litigation over the borderline cases, and you just have completely avoided that in this category.
 Because the -- having a bright line test means that the individual who murders at age 17, 364 days is treated differently than a more -- a less mature individual who is 2 days older.
 But it's an equally arbitrary line if it's 16, 17, or 15.
 Yes, it is, and it's an arbitrary line that the legislatures have set because it's a legislative type determination based on what even Mr. Waxman called legislative facts.
 May I ask one -- have you read the brief of the former U.S. diplomats in the case?
 Yes.
 Do you think we should give any credence whatsoever to the arguments they make?
 No. (Laughter.)
 The respect of other countries for our country is something we should totally ignore.
 That's not for this Court to decide. Congress should consider that. The legislatures should consider that. It's an important consideration, but it is not a consideration under the Eighth Amendment.
 We should leave it up to the legislature of the State of Missouri to resolve those questions.
 Within the parameters of -- of Thompson and Stanford, yes. Yes. The Missouri Supreme Court -- the Atkins v. Virginia -- in Atkins v. Virginia, this Court did not authorize the Missouri Supreme Court to reject Stanford. The Court should refuse to -- to sanction such activity by the lower courts and continue the course it set in that decision. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Layton. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument in Johnson against California. Mr. Deixler.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case presents the issue of whether the California Department of Corrections, unlike every other State in the Federal Bureau of Prisons, may continue its more than 28-year, unexamined practice of routine, blanket racial segregation of its prisoners. The unitary practice in question here was applied more than 350,000 times last year, not just to the 40,000 new prisoners entering the California system, but to all 72,000 returning parolees and hundreds of thousands of transfer prisoners such as the petitioner in this case, Garrison Johnson, a petitioner who had been housed for more than 15 years in the California prison system. This unexamined, routine practice effectively erected whites only, blacks only, Hispanics only signs over the portals of the California prison system, and it is a practice which is routed in racial stereotype and the belief that all persons of a race think alike and act alike. California's needless and dangerous policy fails both the strict scrutiny test, which the Ninth Circuit should have applied, and the Turner deference standard, which the Ninth Circuit wrongly applied.
 Is California the only State, to your knowledge, to apply this procedure?
 Yes, Justice O'Connor, it is. The --
 The -- the statistics showed that there were -- I'm sorry. I don't have it right at my fingerprints -- fingertips -- only about 200,000 processing incidents a year, 200,000 people a year to be processed. I take it that includes some people that are being transferred?
 Yes, correct, Your Honor. In -- in the circumstances in this case, Petitioner Johnson, for example, during his 15 years, had been transferred on five separate occasions, and the circumstances which he experienced are not unusual within the California prison system. Indeed, an outside-the-record fact: within the last three weeks, he's been informed that he's to be transferred yet again within the California prison system to another facility called Corcoran.
 May -- may I put aside for a moment the question of the strength of your argument in transfer situations and simply go to the circumstances of the original receipt of the prisoner for the first time into the prison system? What do the other States -- you say California is the only one that -- that makes this racial assignment like this. What do the other States do to guard against an -- an explosive team-up in -- in double-celled prisoners when -- when they're taking them in for the first time?
 The circumstances in other States, which we've been able to identify, include a range of -- of circumstances, which include -- as is available in California under the penal code section, which requires the delivery of a presentence report, together with a commitment order, is analysis on a particularized circumstance basis of the individuals who are coming into the prison and making a -- an estimate as to what may occur. Other States use a random assignment circumstance, and giving no consideration whatever to race. And a third group of States apparently consider race as part of an overall or holistic bit of analysis with regard to trying to equalize the prison populations.
 Do you know if there are in these other States the same incidents of racial riots or racial killings or racial attacks?
 Well, the best empirical evidence which exists that we're familiar with was reported in the Trulson study, which the dissenters in the Ninth Circuit petition for rehearing en banc relied upon and which the amici have filed with this Court. And in that circumstance, it suggests, over a 10-year study in Texas, that only five percent of all of the interracial -- of -- of all of the incidents of violence in -- in the Texas prison system were what was described by Professor Trulson as having racial motivations. And of that five percent, only one-quarter, or about 1.2 percent, were interracial circumstances where there had been interracial cellmates involved in the racial violence. And that seems to be, as far as anyone has been able to produce in this case in any part of the record, the best empirical data which might respond to your question, Justice Scalia.
 Were there any incidents in California's prisons of same cellmates of different races having episodes of violence? Or -- this is an old policy. So were there incidents like that that led to the development of the policy?
 Justice Ginsburg, one of the interesting things about the record in this case is that the State of California has been unable to identify a single incident of a -- of interracial violence between cellmates. The record is bereft of that kind of information. Rather, they've spoken of information about violence which occurs in more --
 Well, they say that that proves that their policy is very effective. I mean, that's -- (Laughter.)
 I think the -- I think the record suggests, as at least in the testimony of Mr. Johnson, that it is a de facto segregation system which exists after the 60-day period and outside the transfer 60-day period, and so it would be hard for the State of California to provide -- to provide that data.
 Suppose you were to prevail in this case and a court were to enter a decree forbidding this practice. A month later, there is an incident in which one prisoner is seriously injured in a -- in a prison cell because of the interracial assignment policy. Would that be grounds for rethinking the decree?
 Well, Justice Kennedy, it seems to me that under the Court's strict scrutiny analysis, which in my judgment should have applied here, and under the particularized circumstance test announced in the Lee case in the concurrence, that a circumstance involving a single prisoner in a single prison cell on one occasion ought not to give rise to a systematic change in -- in a policy which is rooted in racial stereotype. With regard to those prisoners involved in that particular circumstance, of course, some period of -- of segregation would be appropriate as a means of controlling and ensuring that there's not going to be some kind of wholesale racial violence. That --
 What is -- what is sacrosanct about the -- about the constitutional right not to be subjected to racial stereotype? There are a lot of other constitutional rights that people in prison give up. That's one of the consequences of committing a crime and being sent to prison, the most fundamental constitutional right, the right to -- to walk around and -- and not be seized. Why -- why is it that this -- this one constitutional right cannot yield to what prison authorities believe is -- is a useful, not necessarily essential, but a useful means of -- of maintaining order in prison?
 Well, Justice Scalia, the fundamental teachings on the Fourteenth Amendment of this Court demonstrate that race is different, that the government use of race is presumed to be unlawful --
 Oh, it's -- it's different from First Amendment rights? Prisoners can't hold news conferences. I mean, there are all sorts of very important constitutional rights that I think are no more important than the Equal Protection Clause which prisoners yield when they're in prison. Now, do we subject the taking away of all of these rights to strict scrutiny when the prison authorities do it? I don't think so. I think we say if it's -- if it's the judgment of the -- of the prison authorities, we -- we generally defer to it.
 Yes. The Turner standard certainly reflects a consideration by this Court that deference is appropriate with regard to rights which are inconsistent with incarceration.
 Well, even First Amendment rights.
 Even First Amendment rights.
 Isn't that so?
 Yes, Justice O'Connor.
 Which is a terribly important set of rights for individuals, is it not?
 Yes. The First Amendment rights are very important.
 Right.
 However, in the context of incarceration, a sacrifice of the right to assembly, the right to correspond in certain circumstances, to contact visits are things which are well within the ambit of what a prison needs to control.
 No, I don't think so. I -- why would holding a news conference disrupt a prison? It wouldn't. You say it's too much trouble. We don't want news conferences in prison.
 And in -- and in the circumstances that the Court's test has been announced in Turner, that's certainly within the ambit of a right which the prison authorities might properly exercise.
 And why is this not one?
 Well, because this Court decided --
 Because it -- it is no -- there is no doubt that there are racial gangs in prison, the Aryan Brotherhood and -- and Hispanic gangs and -- and black gangs. There's no doubt that that exists. Is it --
 There's no doubt -- Justice Scalia, there's no doubt that there are racial gangs in prison, but this policy of California is directed not to the gang aspect of it but to the race aspect. The record is clear that there's a near zero percent chance that any black person could be housed with any white person, that any white person could be housed with any Hispanic person, without reference to the gang question. And this is a transfer policy which recurs and recurs, five times in the case of -- of --
 Mr. Deixler, do you think you lose if we apply Turner?
 No, Your Honor. We believe that even under Turner --
 Well, why isn't that the right approach to the case then if that's the -- we don't have to meddle with the rules governing the -- the conduct of prisons, if you can prevail under that theory?
 We would -- we would be pleased to -- to prevail under -- under Turner, Justice Stevens. It seems that consistent with the Court's teachings under the Fourteenth Amendment and the most recent considerations by the Court of equal protection and strict scrutiny, that the use of race by California in this context should trigger a strict scrutiny analysis, should lead to an analysis of whether there has been narrow tailoring. But under the Turner test, we believe properly applied, the petitioner should prevail as well. Under the Turner test, it seems that at least two of the four elements which are announced in Turner couldn't possibly be met here. The first one is it seems to be no -- there is no reasonable relationship between the government regulation which is at issue and the announced policy. The notion that one can determine by race alone a violent propensity seems irrational, unreasonable, and contrary to the only empirical evidence which exists, the Trulson study.
 Suppose you have a population in which 50 percent of all the members of a particular race are a member of a -- of a gang, a gang such as we've read about in -- in the record, Bloods, Crips, et cetera. 50 percent are members of the gang. Would that allow you to segregate?
 No, I don't think such a statistic --
 Is -- is that because you don't equate race gangs with race animosity?
 Well, in fact, in part that's correct, Justice Kennedy. The -- the --
 And -- because it does seem to me that part of your submission, or at least an inference that I drew, was that race-based gangs do not constitute race-based threats. Am I right in saying that that's your submission?
 Without more, Justice Kennedy, that inference cannot be drawn, and I'll give the Court the example of the Crips and the Bloods --
 You mean the inference that the -- which inference? That they are or are not a threat?
 That they are not to the extent that, Justice Kennedy, you're asking whether it is an interracial threat. It is -- it is undoubtedly true, taking the example of the Crips and the Bloods, that they are intra-racial threats, and indeed prison policy directed towards separating Crips and Bloods because of the -- of the intraracial problem is certainly one which would be something that the -- the prison system should address.
 -- assume that a gang poses an interracial threat?
 The -- there's no evidence which has been produced in this record which would suggest that the policy can be tied from skin color to gang membership and from gang membership to interracial violence.
 I -- I asked -- I asked about gang membership. Can gang membership be equated with an interracial threat in any significant number of -- of gangs?
 Not in the record of this case, Justice Kennedy.
 I don't -- you -- you don't need it in the record. You -- you know what the Aryan Brotherhood is. It -- it is a white group that is hostile to blacks in particular, and you know what the Bloods are. It is a black group that -- that is hostile to whites. And -- and does it take any more than common sense to know that if you put a tattooed member of one group in with a tattooed member of the other group, the likelihood of violence in that cell is going to be greater? And is any more than that needed for -- for the -- for the prison not to cell them together? Would you acknowledge that at least if the -- not just on the basis that one is white and one is black, but if the prison knows that -- that one is a member of the Aryan Brotherhood and the other is a member of the Bloods, the prison can refuse to -- to assign them to the same cell?
 Yes.
 Okay.
 What is the --
 All right. Now -- now suppose -- I didn't mean to intrude on Justice Breyer, but just following this question, suppose that 50 percent of all the inmate population in a particular small prison is a member of one of these gangs. Then could you segregate on account of race?
 I think on race alone, the prison system would run afoul of the Constitution in making that determination. If it -- if race were analyzed in the context of gang membership, as part of an overall analysis of proclivity to violence based upon a series of facts existing in that prison, particularized circumstances, as suggested in the Lee case, I think that would be a proper analysis and constitutional. It's --
 Well, would it be a proper analysis simply to -- to separate or not based on gang membership?
 Yes, Justice Souter.
 No. Your answer to Justice Scalia stands on that. So you would not be making an argument that gang membership is merely a surrogate for race in that case if that were the policy.
 Yes. In that particular case, gang membership is not a surrogate for race. In the California policy, race is a surrogate for gang membership.
 Okay.
 I'd like to reserve the balance of my --
 May I -- may I ask just one question? I understand the -- your position that Turner is enough to cover this, but you're going-in position was that race is different, even different than the First Amendment. And you gave one other example, the Eighth Amendment. It may be convenient, make things easier for the administration of a prison if prisoners are tortured every now and then to keep them in line, but obviously, the Eighth Amendment prevails over that. Is there anything else that you say is -- is so fundamental that we don't do it, like torture? And -- and you say race segregation belongs in that category. Anything else?
 Yes. Well, in this Court's opinion in the McKune case under a Fifth Amendment analysis, it was found that that didn't -- it was not analyzed under a Turner standard. And even in the Harper case, before the determination of the liberty right being taken under the Turner standard, the Court relied upon procedural due process rights which were exercised in -- in the State of Washington with regard to -- to the prisoner. I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
 Mr. Clement.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case presents the Court with an opportunity to reaffirm that all government policies based on race are subject to strict scrutiny. The deference generally owed to the sound judgment of prison officials does not require this Court to modify its repeated statements that all government action based on race should be subject to strict scrutiny.
 We say the same about the First Amendment, don't we? All government actions restricting speech are subject to strict scrutiny. Right? And yet, we allow that to occur in prison.
 Well, I think that this Court has recognized in a variety of contexts, including when they have -- when justices have made reference to prison policies, that all government actions based on race are subject to strict scrutiny.
 Unlike the First Amendment.
 The First Amendment obviously has been subjected, at least when you're talking about things other than outgoing prisoner mail, to be subjected to the Turner analysis, but note -- this Court has never suggested that the Turner analysis applies to race.
 Mr. Clement, will you tell us how the Government would come out applying the Turner analysis in this case?
 Absolutely, Justice Stevens. I think if the Turner analysis is correctly applied in this case, this policy does not even survive Turner analysis. I would suggest it's very analogous to the marriage policy that the Court struck down in Turner applying the Turner analysis because there the State identified a concern with inmate marriages and particularly with inmate-to-inmate marriages, and yet they adopted a policy that prohibited all inmate marriages. Here there's a concern that's expressed with newly arriving inmates, about whom California says it knows very little. Yet, it applies its policies to transferring inmates, as well as to returning parolees.
 And why should we decide the constitutional question?
 Well, I think either one of those would be a constitutional --
 Well, it's --
 -- holding of this Court, and I think either under Turner or under strict scrutiny, it's still equally a constitutional holding. And I think it would send an improper message to suggest that there's some element of government decision-making that is somehow exempt from strict scrutiny. I think in a variety of contexts, this Court, where it generally reviews a government action deferentially -- take, for example, jury selection, peremptory challenges. Take, for example, military policy. Take, for example, congressional districting. Those are all government policies this Court generally refuse -- reviews under a highly deferential standard. Yet, nonetheless, when it comes to government policies based on race, this Court applies strict scrutiny. And in that sense, I think the racial districting cases provide a very good example because there, generally, as the Vieth case from last term illustrates, this Court is very reluctant to do any review of the districting lines that are drawn. Yet, when race is identified as being the cause for the lines being drawn, as in Miller against Johnson, this Court emphasizes that strict scrutiny applies.
 Is -- is there an argument to be made that the reason we make that emphasis and -- and an argument for you in this case that there is somehow a greater fragility to -- to the effective standards to prevent racial classification than there is to the possibility of enforcing speech rights and so on? Is there something to worry about here more than in the case of -- of enumerated rights that -- that gets the Turner analysis?
 Well, I think that's part of it, Justice Souter. I think one thing is that particularly because of the history of this country and the use of -- of race by governments, including in prisons, there is a concern that all government uses of race must be subjected to very heightened scrutiny.
 Yes, but there's a pretty frightening history about speech restriction too.
 Well, again, I think, though, that there is almost a uniquely pernicious history involving race in this country, and I think, again, it is completely wrong to suggest that somehow prisons were exempt from that history. To the contrary. Throughout the Nation before Brown against Board of Education, it was common for prisons to be segregated on the basis of race.
 This is not a permanent segregation in these California prisons. It's just temporary, isn't it? How long does it last?
 It lasts 60 days, is the best evidence.
 Until -- until they -- they have assurance that -- that the individuals are -- are not members of a gang and likely to, in -- in their view, commit racial violence if -- if co-celled with another prisoner.
 With respect, Justice --
 If it were permanent, your argument about this, you know, this is a long tradition of our prisons. We -- we keep the blacks and the whites separate. That -- that's not what they're doing in California. It's a temporary -- it's a temporary measure.
 With respect, Justice Scalia, in Lee against Washington, this Court upheld the integration not just of the Alabama prisons, but the Alabama jails, and the evidence before the Court there -- and this is clear from the three-judge opinion -- is that the average stay in the Birmingham city jail was seven to 15 days. Nonetheless, this Court said that seven to 15 days of racial segregation was too much.
 Okay, but we didn't announce a standard.
 That was for the whole stay.
 Well, that's true, Justice Souter. I mean, I think if you look at Brown against Board of Education itself and you look at the various per curiam opinions that this Court issued in the wake of Brown v. Board, I don't think any of those decisions have a hallmark of being elaborate about the standard of review that the Court has applied. Nonetheless --
 What does seven -- what does seven to 15 days have to do with anything? It was for the whole stay that they were segregated. The stay may have been short, but the fact that during their entire period they were segregated showed that there was no other purpose to this thing except to keep the races separate. Whereas, here, they are kept separate for -- for the time which the California prison believes it needs in order to assure that there won't be violence, and once that assurance is given, the races are -- are mixed. That's a totally different situation.
 With respect, Justice Scalia, I disagree. The entire time these prisoners are kept at the reception center, which is a separate part of the facility where the incoming inmates go, that entire time they are segregated on the basis of race. Now, the Bureau of Prisons, for example, has a similar entry section in its various prisons. It's called the admissions and orientations process, and there, using the presentence reports that are provided for by California law, the Federal officials evaluate prisoners and their risk levels and have no need to segregate those prisoners on the basis of race.
 One of -- one of California's response said, well, the Feds have mostly income tax evaders, maybe some drug dealers, but the State prisoners are the real tough guys, the real violent criminals. So --
 They have a high class of felons in the Federal prison basically.
 With respect, Your Honors, that misdescribes the -- the population of the Federal prisons. Part of where I think they get off on the wrong step is they do their analysis only on the offense of conviction. But a lot of the individuals in the Federal prisons are, say, for example, convicted felons who are convicted for felony in possession. And the underlying felony that led them to be, say, a 924(c) defendant was a violent felony. And so we -- there are also agreements by which the Bureau of Prisoners, on request from States, will house the State's most violent criminals. So I think that's an unfair description of what the Bureau of Prisons policy -- or population looks like. And I think the fact that the Bureau of Prisons and virtually every other State that's looked at this issue has found a mechanism to deal with the problem of incoming inmates without resorting to race is a powerful indication that this kind of use of race is unnecessary. And the problem with applying Turner, rather than strict scrutiny, I think is well illustrated by this case and this policy. This is a policy that is expressly acknowledged to take race into account, and it is nowhere written down. If you pull the Department of Correction manual for the California prison system, there's a 94-page chapter on the classification of inmates. Yet, this policy doesn't appear there. It's an unwritten policy. Justice Ginsburg, you asked, well, was this policy introduced in response to specific incidents of violence in a cell. The answer to that is unknowable because nobody even knows how long this policy has been in place. The official responsible for administering it acknowledged it's been in place for 25 years.
 Why -- why does that affect the Turner analysis? I'm sorry. I don't understand.
 What I'm suggesting, Justice O'Connor, is what the -- the application of Turner to this policy allowed. It's to allow an unwritten policy where -- of uncertain origins --
 I thought you told us earlier it wouldn't survive Turner. I -- I don't understand your argument.
 Well, it wouldn't survive a proper analysis under Turner. That is correct. But the -- the court of appeals here, applying its version of Turner, upheld this policy. And I think one way of looking at the choice between Turner and strict scrutiny is whether there is a greater threat that frequent judicial approvals of prisons' use of race will have the effect of diluting the strict scrutiny rigor or whether frequent disapprovals of prisons' use of race will have the effect of undermining the Turner deference. And the concern of the Federal Government is exactly that, that by having race policies evaluated under Turner, there will be a necessary temptation to bump up the Turner analysis in a way that strikes down racial policies.
 You're concerned about evaluating prison race policies. Are there any other prison policies in the country that adopt a racial test like that?
 Well, I think -- I think California -- it's -- it's best described as California is one of at most a couple of States that have a comparable cell-based policy of segregation. And so I think it really is kind of the outlier in terms of that analysis. Now, there may be situations -- and we think strict scrutiny can account for them -- where States want to take race into account in particularized circumstances. And I think testing those under strict scrutiny is the proper mode of analysis.
 Your --
 Thank you, Mr. Clement.
 Thank you, Your Honor.
 Mr. -- Ms. Grunder.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Turner's unitary deferential standard of review balances inmates' rights with the exceptionally dangerous and difficult job of running a prison. The Turner standard applies here because the need for prison deference doesn't change with the nature of the right asserted. California is Ground Zero for raced-based prison and street gangs. The Aryan Brotherhood, the Black Guerilla Family, the Mexican Mafia, and the Nuestra Familia --
 Is there any evidence in the record that the initial placing of two inmates in the same cell has ever had -- has ever produced a racial incident?
 In the reception center, Your Honor?
 Pardon me?
 In the reception centers?
 Yes.
 No, because the -- the inmates are not interracially housed.
 You've never tried it.
 There's nothing in the record, Your Honor. The policy has been in effect for a considerable length of time, and -- and during that time, they have not interracially housed inmates in the same cell. I think it's important to remember here that the policy only applies in the reception center areas and in the cells.
 But it applies in the reception center area for someone who has been transferred as well as the -- an initial incarceration.
 It's a very shortened period for a transferee. It's only 14 days under the California regulations, and it only applies if they are put in a cell. If there is someone who is eligible to be housed in a dormitory, that is, somebody who has been convicted of a less violent offense or they have more information about, then the dormitories are fully integrated, as well as every other aspect of the reception center.
 But -- I'm sorry. Even in the case of -- of housing in cells, what's the justification for it? The argument is -- excuse me -- on the initial intake, we don't know enough about them. Well, on -- on the transfer, you've had plenty of time to know about them. Why is it justifiable even for 14 days on -- on the transfer?
 That's what I don't understand too. That -- that's really what most troubles me about this case. Why -- why do you do this to the transferees at all?
 There's a -- there's a couple of reasons, Your Honors. First of all, as much as you may know about the transferring individual, you may not know the information about their prospective cellmate at the transfer institution because they may be somebody who's a newly received cellmate, somebody who is going through a reception center process themselves.
 Well, unless you house them with the cellmate, what are you going to learn from segregating them for 14 days?
 What happens when they arrive at the receiving institution is there needs to be time for a record review. The records do not arrive at the exact same time as the inmates. And so they convene a classification committee and at which point they review the records.
 Well, if we have a choice between segregating by race and speeding up the delivery of records, isn't it constitutionally preferable to get the records delivered on time?
 The records need to stay with the inmate at the old prison until the inmate leaves on the bus for the new prison because --
 Why? Don't you have xeroxes? (Laughter.)
 Well, in the case of California, there's over 165,000 inmates. In Mr. Johnson's case, his records probably are many, many banker's boxes full of records. So that's the type of --
 When -- when -- there's a transferee from prison A to prison B and he goes to the reception center. Does that transferee get housed with other transferees or is he also housed, from time to time or often, with new entrants into the system?
 He may be housed with new entrants into the system and that -- that's the reason --
 So -- so as to one-half of the people in that -- in that instance, you don't know what the other inmate's record is.
 That's correct, Your Honor. And I would like to --
 You could house transferees only with other transferees, I assume.
 That's --
 Is that -- is that too hard to figure out?
 That's possible, Your Honor. That currently is not the practice, but that is possible.
 Ms. Grunder, is this policy a -- an unwritten policy of California?
 It is -- yes, it is a practice. I wouldn't characterize it a policy. It's a practice.
 An admitted practice but not written.
 That's correct, Your Honor.
 And is -- does any other State have such a policy, written or otherwise?
 Yes, they do, Your Honor, and I would like to address that. The two largest States of inmate population, California and Texas, together comprise about 300,000 inmates, which is about 20 percent of the total inmate prison population in the United States, including the Bureau of Prisons. Those two States have a similar policy. In addition, Oklahoma --
 What is Texas' policy? Is that in writing?
 Yes, I believe it is, Your Honor. When Texas was subjected to the integration decree, the one area of the prison that was not part of the decree that they did not require them to integrate was the area that is the equivalent of our reception center. There -- there in --
 Is in the briefs? I don't remember it from the briefs. Did -- did you discuss this in --
 Yes, Your Honor, it is in the briefs. It's -- it has to do with the Trulson study, and the Trulson study indicated that the intake diagnostic centers of Texas were not required to be integrated.
 All right. If we -- if we exclude Texas and California, on your recording, we've still got 80 percent of the -- the prison population in the United States, and apparently neither the Federal prisons nor any State does -- apart from Texas, has this policy. Why -- I mean, how do you account for the fact that there doesn't seem to be any evidence that -- that they are having explosive incidents involving new members based upon racial animosity?
 Your Honor, actually there's another State, Oklahoma, which has a very similar policy that says that --
 Okay. We've still got 47 States left. How -- how do you explain the fact that -- and -- and some of them don't have your racial problems. There's no question about it. I come from one that does not. But some do. And -- and how do you explain the fact that there is no sort of confirmatory record of what happens when you don't follow your policy?
 Well, I think the answer is that they don't have the same problems that California has. California has the most prison gangs, the -- they are race-based. It's an extraordinarily difficult situation. And even the Bureau of Prisons takes race into account when it balances its prisons and that's in the United States' brief.
 May I go back to Texas? Because one of the pieces of information that was featured by the other side was this study in Texas that showed a decline in interracial violence when there was an increase in racial integration. So that empirical study showed just the opposite, that when you integrate, you get less violence than when you separate.
 Yes, Your Honor. The Trulson study, however, only looked at inmates after they had left the reception center, only looked at inmates in -- in the integrated settings of the prison, equivalent to the areas that California integrates. So we don't dispute that once you have enough individualized information about an inmate, then you can house them according to an individualized information.
 On the individualized, there was something that I didn't grasp. You say we don't know anything about these people, so we have to have that 60-day period to find out about them. The presentence report we're told accompanies the conviction, the prisoner's conviction. So the presentence report will have a fair amount of information about the offender, will it not?
 It would have a fair amount of information. However, in California, the presentence report does not always accompany the inmate and frequently does not. It follows some period of time later from the county.
 But again, that's the kind of administrative problem that would seem easily fixable. I thought the -- the rule or the regulation was that the presentence report is supposed to accompany the conviction.
 But the fact of the matter is, Your Honor, the counties aren't preparing the presentences -- presentence reports in a timely fashion, and -- and they're not sending them --
 Well, maybe something should be done about that.
 Yes, with the counties, perhaps. But another issue with the presentence report is it doesn't deal with in-prison behavior, and that's what the prison officials need a -- need time to take a look at, is how the inmate is going to react once they get in the prison environment, which is a wholly different environment than a jail environment.
 May I ask what's probably a stupid question? We're concerned, I suppose, about say, a black prisoner who's just coming into prison for the first time and you hope he won't join one of the black gangs. So wouldn't the safest thing to do for the first 20 days is to put him with a cellmate who's not black?
 No, Your Honor, because in prison the animosity between the gangs is purely race-based, and that inmate may be subjected --
 Between the gangs. But I'm assuming a new prisoner who you have no information about. Do you presume he's a member of a gang or presume he's somebody who may not be a member of a gang?
 There's not a presumption that the person is a member of the gang. But there is a presumption --
 Well, if he's not a member of the gang, isn't the danger that he'll become affiliated with the gang increased by insisting on putting him with the same race as -- as he is?
 That may be, but there is also a danger that if he is housed interracially and subjected to gang pressures on the yard, that he will then be in a situation to go back to his cell, when the door is closed and the lights are out, and commit violent acts upon his cellmate at -- because of pressures that he's receiving from members of his own race.
 Of course, you -- you have never -- no evidence that that's ever happened because you've never tried it.
 In the reception centers, no. The -- it has been a policy of not cross-racially housing the inmates in the cells only. That's correct, Your Honor.
 You -- you said a second ago that there's a significant difference between the conditions in the jails and the conditions in -- in the prisons. Is that significant difference the -- the organization of -- of racially based gangs in the prisons as distinct from the jails?
 Yes, I think that's true. And there's also a difference I think in the attitude of -- of the inmates when they're in -- in a state of flux in a jail as opposed to when they arrive to serve their many years-long sentence, in the case of Mr. Johnson, 37 years to life. And then I think the reality sets in and -- and things do change. Prison is very different.
 Apart from the gang situation, is there reason to think that their minds change in the sense of inclining them to interracial violence simply because they say, gee, I'm in for a long time?
 Yes, I -- I believe it is.
 And do we have any evidence to that effect?
 Well, the reality in prison is that people are pressured to join gangs and to -- you either hang with your own or you don't and --
 But that -- I mean, that goes back to the gang membership situation. It seems to me that's your strongest argument.
 Yes, it's true. But even for members -- people who are not actually members of the gang are subjected to the gang pressures. For instance, if -- if there was going to be a fight, a planned fight, that was going to break out on a yard, members of a prison gang would tell members of -- of their same race that once the fight breaks out, you better be with us because if you're not, we'll deal with you later. And that's even for people who aren't gang members. So the racial pressures in prison are very, very severe. Something --
 But it still seems to me that a new inmate is more likely to be subjected to that pressure with the -- his cellmates than with somebody out in the yard.
 And he may well be, Your Honor, but what --
 And it seems to me insurance against him joining a racial gang is cell -- cell him with somebody who's not of the same race.
 But you -- but to do that would be to invite danger to the -- to the other inmate. The -- the level of interracial violence in prison is high, and that can't be disregarded. And if we weren't here today --
 How does it compare to intraracial violence?
 There hasn't, as -- as we've talked about, been a problem with interracial violence in the cells because they're not housed that way. There are problems with --
 I mean --
 In general.
 -- overall.
 There are some problems with intraracial violence, but they're generally more founded in personal relations as opposed to a race-based -- you know, some other sort of animosity. The same sort of reasons that people have fights on the outside --
 But there -- is there any figures on the prison population as a whole, the incidents of interracial violence as opposed to intraracial violence?
 No, Your Honor. In this case there's -- it's not in the record.
 And do we know -- does this record tell us what happens after the 60 days? To what extent where there are double cells, does the same race policy, although not formally adopted, continue? After the 60 days, what is the incidence of different race double-celling and same race double-celling?
 What we do have in the record, Your Honor, is that the policy and the practice does not apply after the 60 days. Inmates are allowed to request a cell together and can choose their own cellmates so long as the other cellmate agrees.
 So we just don't have any information whether this line between the 60 days is imaginary.
 We do, Your Honor. The -- it is not -- it does not happen outside of the reception center cell practice. Once they get to their permanent housing assignment, they may choose their own cellmates.
 When -- when they do choose that, do you respect a choice to cell with -- with another member of -- of the -- of -- do you respect the choice when two members of a gang want to cell together?
 Two members of the same gang?
 Same gang.
 It -- it would depend on if they are -- what level of gang membership they are. California has a very complex system for what -- doing what they call validating gang membership. If they are a validated gang member, generally they are sent to a special prison, and yes, they are housed with members of their own gangs in a very high security setting.
 Do you -- do you have a -- do you have any record of -- of requests by different -- members of different gangs to cell together?
 We don't have any record of that, but I -- I can tell you that if members of opposing gangs were to request a cell together, first of all, they would both have to agree, which would be highly unlikely, and there -- it would probably be viewed with a bit of suspicion as to what was going on. But maybe if -- if they had disavowed their gang membership and -- and these particular people could get along, it would certainly be considered. The -- the object, once they get to the permanent housing, is cellmate compatibility. So there are a lot of things that are looked at.
 Ms. Grunder, do you agree with opposing counsel that even if evaluated under the Turner rule, properly applied, that California's policy would not survive?
 I do not agree with counsel. I believe that the Ninth Circuit did properly apply the Turner standard in this case and that California would pass and does pass the Turner test in this case.
 It wouldn't -- it wouldn't pass if -- would it, if we do not accept your argument that California cannot efficiently get records sent along with inmates so that, at the time at least of transfers, the prisons are in a position to know what they're getting? If we -- if we say, look, we're not going to accept the argument from administrative efficiency, then you can't survive Turner, can you?
 Well, it may be more than just administrative efficiency because every prison is different and there are different gang pressures at each prison. And I think it's important for the prison to be allowed an opportunity to bring that transferred inmate in and look at them and how they're going to fit into that prison and have a chance to evaluate their records. It's true that --
 Well, that's --
 I'm sorry, Your Honor.
 No. I don't want to cut your argument short, but here's what's bothering me. I -- I can see there's a possible plausibility in what you're saying, but in fact is that the reason? Is there any evidence in the record to the effect that that is necessary in transfer situations?
 The officials have deemed that that is an appropriate policy. I think the record is a bit scant in this case.
 Okay. Look, if -- if we accept that officials have deemed it, we will not have many arguments in -- in this Court. I mean, they will be over before they start. I -- I mean, we've got to have something more than simply the decision under attack. Is there anything more in this case in -- with respect to the transferee situation?
 Not with respect to the transferees, Your Honor, and it's true that the transfer policy certainly is more in jeopardy under the Turner standard. But the -- the overall policy of considering race when there is a -- a lack of information certainly would pass the Turner standard and should pass the Turner standard as it was properly applied by the Ninth Circuit.
 You said that --
 May I ask just one other question about the -- the purpose you're trying to achieve? Is it to protect the two inmates who are first celled together from fighting with one another, or is it to avoid the danger that one of them will somehow start a riot later on in -- in the general prison population?
 It's multi-fold, Your Honor.
 It's what?
 It's multi-fold. The purpose is multi-fold. First, yes, it is to protect the inmate from -- from having harm done to him in the cell, which is a very difficult area to protect. It's a small area and not easily visible into the -- into the cell directly. Also, that's where they sleep, so at some point the lights will be out. So it's a very difficult situation. Also, they're afraid -- and this is in the record from the testimony of the officials -- that there will be a ripple effect and that the interracial violence, if they were to cell them together, would spill out onto the yards and create the exact ripple effect that Turner -- is one of the considerations in the Turner test.
 There was something --
 May I ask -- excuse me. Go ahead. I want to ask one other question. You -- you mentioned the Texas system and you discussed it in your brief. Is that correct? I didn't find it in your discussion as to the Texas case.
 Yes, Your Honors, at page 41 of the brief. It would be the -- the second paragraph where they examine double-celling only after initial screening. And also note 13 of the Trulson study indicates that it did not apply in Texas' equivalent of California's reception centers. The Turner standard is the appropriate standard here because it does give the prison officials --
 Let -- let me ask --
 I'm sorry.
 -- about that standard at least as the Ninth Circuit applied it. They said that you presume the practice constitutional and the challenger has the burden to show that if there were no segregation by race, that violence would not increase. Now, how does someone go about proving that negative?
 Well, in this case the inmate put forth no experts of any kind. There was an opportunity for the inmate to rebut the evidence put forth by the prison officials, and -- and there was no evidence submitted. So in this case he didn't --
 But how would an inmate who was objecting to this racial segregation go about proving such a case? You said one would have to rely on experts.
 That would be one way, Your Honor.
 And so one could put in that Texas study, but you said that wouldn't be good enough.
 Well, the Texas study doesn't -- doesn't apply to the initial intake process.
 So you -- you -- supposing an inmate who would have to call a bevy of experts that he has no wherewithal to -- to pay for -- I mean, you are essentially saying an inmate cannot challenge this policy.
 No, Your Honor. Actually this policy was applied in a California case after the Johnson case was decided in California to strike down a race-based prison policy. So there -- there certainly are instances when the inmate could --
 Well, I asked how would an inmate prove this, and you said you would need experts. So for experts, you need money to pay experts. How does an inmate do that?
 Well, the same way the inmate would do it in any other litigation that is brought by an inmate. The burden is on a litigant to prove their case, and it doesn't change because that litigant is in prison.
 Now, why -- why should you use the Turner standard? The Turner standard says to the prison, you can do this as long as you have a modestly good reason. Strict scrutiny says you have to have a very good reason. With free speech, of course, people understand prisons are different. Of course, people's speech rights will be controlled and it won't hurt the rest of society. With racial discrimination, as you heard your opponents argue, it's a terrible symbol, a symbol that we would tolerate without the best of reasons discrimination, invidious discrimination, based on race, which is divisive to the whole society. Now, that they say is a very good reason for not applying the Turner standard but, rather, applying strict scrutiny, which gives you freedom to discriminate on this basis if you can prove you really have to.
 Unlike in a non-prison setting, there aren't other rights to be balanced. In the prison setting, not only are you balancing the inmate's right to be free from discrimination, but you're balancing the -- the rights of all inmates to be free from harm, and as well as the prison officials' duty to protect them from harm. And that is what --
 That -- that same argument could have made in -- in arguing about racial segregation in the schools and -- and in the military and everything else. That's -- that's not an acceptable answer.
 Well, there's -- there's no -- the prison officials here have an affirmative duty to protect the other inmates under the Eighth Amendment, and --
 Do you accept that this is invidious discrimination on the basis of race? What -- what -- why -- why do you think it's invidious?
 We don't think it's invidious, Your Honor. As a matter of fact --
 It's not affirmative action.
 This is not affirmative action, no. It is not invidious, Justice Scalia. It is simply one consideration of race to control violence in prison, and as the Bureau of Prisons uses in -- in its prisons, they in the United States' brief say that they consider race to maintain racial balance in their prisons for the purpose of diversity. California also considers race in maintaining racial balance in its prisons, not primarily for the purpose of diversity, but for prison safety to make sure that no one group takes over a prison, thus putting members of another group in a vulnerable situation. There are many circumstances when -- when race should be --
 Is that -- is that invidious?
 No, it is not, Your Honor.
 Is it affirmative action?
 No. There are many instances in which race needs to be considered on a day-to-day basis in prison. For instance, when the prisoners line up to go to the exercise yard, if 10 white prisoners line up first and the 11th prisoner in line is an African American, it would be extraordinarily ill-advised to release those prisoners in the manner in which they have lined up to go to yard. It would require some reshuffling and maybe even some shifting of prisoners from yard to yard based on their race because to do that would put the minority member at extreme risk. Turner is the appropriate test here because courts --
 I -- I -- this may -- may be important to me for understanding your argument. I -- I didn't quite understand the hypothetical. You -- you want him to keep the place in line or it's dangerous for him to keep the place in line?
 It would be dangerous for the officer to release the inmates onto the yard in the manner that they had self-arrayed because then you would put 10 members or more of one group on the yard and then introduce another member to the yard who was not a member of that group, and that would be very dangerous for the -- the sole person on the yard.
 And do -- do other prison systems adopt similar policies to try to keep the races mixed generally in --
 Yes, they do, Your Honor. As I pointed out, Bureau of Prisons being one. As a matter of fact, the U.S. Department of Justice's National Corrections Institute statistics -- and this is not a part of the record -- indicate that 96 percent of all States separate prisoners based on disruptive group or gang orientation. So California is not alone in that. It's a -- it's done to prevent violence to other prisoners. In sum, Turner is the only test that provides the flexibility that prison officials need to safely manage their prisons and protect inmates from harm. The Court should apply it here and affirm the lower court. Thank you.
 Thank you, Ms. Grunder. Mr. Deixler, you have about three and a half minutes.
 The -- the hypotheticals presented by the State of California, when applied in the context of this case, demonstrate the danger of this position of segregation. The petitioner in this case is not a gang member. He's been in the California prison system since 1987 and before. When he reported to the inmate reception center at Chino in 1987, he had already three presentence reports which are reflected in -- in the record of this -- of this case at the joint exhibit 259. He's been transferred five times since then -- since then. There's no record of his having had interracial violence ever during the time that he was in prison. And it is his view, as articulated in his deposition at page 109 of the joint appendix, that he is put into peril because he is an African American who is unable to cross race lines and unable to reach out for support in a heavily racialized setting for other persons who are not African Americans and who are not gang members. So he's been marginalized and treated, based upon his race, in a de jure way when he's transferred for the 60-day period. And incidentally, the reference to a 14-day period is not borne out by the record. The regulation in the State of California specifically provides that this organization or evaluation group has to convene within 14 days, but not have to reach a decision with regard to transfer characterization and classification in 14 days. But -- but the petitioner in this case, because he's black and has no opportunity to cell initially with a white person or a Hispanic person, is then confined to being in this small group of African Americans who are not gang members and who are unable to have an affinity group in which they will feel safe within the California prison system. The California --
 The same thing would happen to a white. It's not because he's black. I mean, this -- right? The same thing would happen to a white.
 Yes. A white --
 He'd be able to make the same argument.
 A white who, for reasons of safety, wished to house with an African American, would be denied that opportunity under California's policy, and the same with an Hispanic who felt it safer for him to house with a black. He could not cross racial lines based upon the evidence in this case, Justice Scalia. That's correct. And the danger which is created in my judgment by a reliance upon a Turner standard in this circumstance is that all that needs to be done is a little bit more of tinkering with the idea of the equivalence between race and gang which cannot exist in this record. And were that to happen, we will create a circumstance where the very arguments rejected in Lee, indeed the very argument advanced by the State of California in this case, will once again be raised time and again, and we will be faced with a circumstance not too far down the slippery slope where, for convenience or for other reasons or for purely invidious reasons, States will be able to return to an era of segregation. This Court's history has demonstrated a commitment to march the country away from the road of segregation, and there should be no turning back. This is a case in which the Ninth Circuit has erred. The judgment of the Ninth Circuit should be reversed. The Court should determine that strict scrutiny should apply, and it should determine that Petitioner Johnson's equal protection rights were violated.
 Thank you, Mr. Deixler. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument in No. 03 710, Devenpeck against Alford. Ms. Hart.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The Ninth Circuit invalidated Mr. Alford's arrest and held the arresting officers in this case personally liable for damages based on the closely related offense doctrine. The doctrine is contrary to fundamental Fourth Amendment principles that probable cause is an objective inquiry based on all of the facts and circumstances known to the officer at arrest. In contrast, the closely related offense doctrine is a subject of inquiry that limits probable cause only to those facts and circumstances closely related to the offense that the arresting officer announces at arrest. Under the doctrine, then if two officers observe precisely the same facts and circumstances and arrest the suspect, the arrest in one case can be valid and in the other invalid based only on the officer's subjective legal evaluation --
 Ms. Hart, is there any requirement in Washington or generally that an officer state the grounds for the arrest to the person being arrested at the time?
 Justice O'Connor, there's no constitutional requirement and there is no requirement in -- in Washington that that be done. A number of States do require that it be done statutorily and many of those States also --
 We're dealing here with a case from the State of Washington, and you assert there is no such requirement in Washington.
 There is not.
 But in this case when the respondent was arrested, he was informed by the officer that the arrest was for making a tape recording of the conversation?
 That is correct.
 And it turns out -- do you concede that that was, in fact, not a lawful grounds for arrest?
 That -- at this point, the question of the --
 Do you concede that --
 Your Honor --
 -- that in the State of Washington, that it is perfectly lawful to record the conversation with the police?
 This -- the facts of this particular case have not been before a -- a court in Washington, Your Honor.
 But I'm asking you. What is your view? Is it lawful or not for an individual to record, tape record, the conversation with a policeman on the occasion of a stop?
 Your Honor, I believe in this case there would be probable cause for an officer to believe it was and therefore effect an arrest. I don't believe that the -- the question has been answered in Washington, and I believe there are good grounds to argue that it would be permissible and that, indeed, unlike the decision in State v. Flora, there were distinguishing circumstances here, including the absence of passers-by on the scene.
 Well, do we decide this case on the understanding that it was lawful to make the recording? Is that the basis in which we decide this case?
 No, Your Honor. We have not raised the Privacy Act as an issue before this Court.
 Well, for argument --
 Now, Washington also has an anti-stacking policy, does it?
 The State Patrol does, Your Honor, yes.
 Is -- is that just a rule of the patrolmen in the State?
 It --
 They won't arrest someone for several charges?
 It's an agency policy and troopers with the Washington State Patrol are trained to it.
 Well, is it an agency policy that the State endorses, and if so, why -- why do you endorse or adopt the policy?
 Well, Your Honor, I believe that -- that stacking charges really is -- there are good reasons to endorse the policy. One is that it's not a particular --
 Not -- not stacking charges you mean.
 I'm sorry. Not stacking charges, Your Honor, is -- is an -- a sound policy for a number of reasons. First, it's not a particularly effective or efficient use of law enforcement resources, but perhaps more importantly, it can have significant negative consequences for people who are subject to arrest in terms of their ability -- the amount of bail, their ability to post bail, and to secure a pre-trial release.
 Well, is that -- I mean, is that the -- the real basis for the policy, that we -- that Washington does not want to make it difficult for -- for arrestees to raise bail?
 Your Honor, I can't tell you precisely what the Washington State Patrol's thinking is on it. My impression is that, in part, they believe that -- that the appropriate law enforcement response is -- is to determine whether there's probable cause and to arrest and leave the sorting out of the charges to be pressed actually by the State to the prosecuting attorney.
 What do you make of the argument that unless the cause of the arrest is, number one, stated and, number two, a -- a cause that a defendant can rely on, that in any case like this in which the stated grounds of the arrest turn out to be -- we will assume, turn out to be inadequate, the police will always, particularly in traffic cases, be able to come up with something later on to justify the arrest? What -- what do you make of that argument?
 Well, I -- I think what I would make of it, Justice Souter, is that provided that there's probable cause for arrest, that the fact that there may be a basis to -- to stop a number of -- of motorists is not -- is not relevant. And in part, I believe that, for example, this Court's decision in Whren indicates that so long as there is probable cause for arrest, the reason for the --
 But that was for an -- an arrest in which, so far as we can tell, the -- the stated grounds for the arrest were those for which there was probable cause. And I think one of the concerns underlying the argument that I asked you to comment on is that if the -- if the police, in effect, have -- have discretion ad lib afterwards to come up with new grounds for the arrest, there's -- there's going to be a kind of a basic corrosion in the integrity of the arrest process and in the confidence of people to believe that the police are really acting in good faith when they make an arrest.
 Well, Your Honor, the -- if there is probable cause for arrest, that is the concern of the Fourth Amendment, and I -- I don't believe that the -- the concern -- I don't know that there's any empirical evidence that the concern that you are expressing has been borne out.
 That -- that may be -- that may be the -- the best response. And I take it, so far as you know, there -- there are no studies that have gone into this on an empirical basis. Is that correct, so far as you know?
 Not as -- as far as I know, Your Honor. But I would also suggest to you that the notion that an officer would effect an arrest without any basis for the arrest on a hope that a prosecuting attorney can come up with a basis for the arrest --
 No. The -- the argument is that he thinks he does have a ground. It turns out that he's wrong. Unless he is very unimaginative, he'll find another one. It's not that he arrests saying I have no basis to arrest this person, but I'll think of something later. It's -- it's the -- the problem is, I think -- or the argument, I think, is directed to a case like this.
 Well, and -- and Your Honor, I -- I do believe that the concern of the Fourth Amendment, which is the only constitutional provision at issue in this case, is that there in fact be a reasonable basis for arrest and that subsequently or promptly subsequently or prior to arrest be tested by a neutral magistrate. And that's the only concern.
 Ms. Hart, I'm -- I'm not sure what you mean by -- that there has to be probable cause for arrest. Do you mean objectively, or do you mean on the basis of the facts known to the arresting officer? I mean, let's -- let's assume an officer stops a car for a broken taillight, and it turns out the car doesn't have a broken taillight. All right? So that basis is wrong. However, the car also has an expired inspection sticker, which the officer didn't know about. Was there a probable cause for arrest, as you're using the term here?
 If there was probable cause based on the -- if there was reason based on the objective facts and circumstances --
 And it doesn't matter whether he knew those facts and circumstances.
 -- that -- known to the officer at arrest.
 Oh, so it has to be known.
 Yes.
 So in my example, the arrest would be invalid because at the time of the arrest, he didn't know about the sticker.
 Absent the circumstances at arrest giving rise to a reasonable basis to believe that a crime had been committed, there would not be probable cause.
 So you're saying it's the facts known to the officer --
 Precisely.
 -- that have to establish the probable --
 That's --
 Once -- once you establish that limitation, are you willing to accept the horrible that -- that Justice Souter proposed to you? Is it -- is it, indeed, so easy to -- to gin up some other cause for arrest when you used a mistaken cause? I don't know that it's all that easy.
 It is not and -- and -- it is not. And that was the -- the reason why I indicated in response to Justice Souter's question that I do believe that it is not all that easy. And I -- I believe that one of the foremost commentators in this area has termed that notion fanciful for the reason that it is -- it is stopping on a hope and a prayer that something will provide justification for that later --
 That was LaFave. You cited LaFave in your brief for that proposition.
 Yes.
 You -- you made the point, in answer to Justice O'Connor, that a police officer in Washington is not required to divulge on the spot the reason for the arrest. What is the point at which the arrestee under Washington law is entitled to know the cause of the arrest?
 At charging, Your Honor, there -- there -- the -- the individual who has been arrested, as a matter of the Sixth Amendment, would be entitled to know the charges against him or her, and the officer is required, in a warrantless arrest, to appear before a neutral magistrate and have the probable cause for the arrest tested --
 Is it -- is it at the arraignment or the -- at the earlier booking in the police station?
 I'm sorry. I'm not following your question.
 Is it -- is it -- is the time when the arrestee must told you are being arrested for X reason, is that when the arrestee appears before the magistrate or is it earlier when he's brought into the police station and he's booked? The arrest is booked. At which point?
 Neither, Justice Ginsburg. The arrestee would be entitled constitutionally to know the charge against him or her when criminal -- a criminal prosecution is commenced by charging. For the most part, that is done in Washington by an information or a charge filed by a prosecuting attorney.
 You mean he could be held until a charge is filed without being told why he's being held?
 Justice Stevens --
 So that could be a week or 2.
 But it would be -- he would be held in that case following a determination by a neutral magistrate that there are grounds to hold him. And at that point --
 Would the magistrate keep those grounds secret?
 They would not be secret, Your Honor, no.
 Well, wouldn't the magistrate tell him why he's being held?
 The magistrate would tell the -- the arrestee why he's being held, provided the arrestee is present for that particular procedure.
 And how soon is he entitled to appear before the magistrate?
 I'm sorry?
 How soon after his physical arrest does he have a right to appear before the magistrate?
 My -- my recollection under Washington's law would be -- 72 hours is the time for the charge.
 So for 72 hours, he could be held incommunicado without knowing why he was arrested.
 But -- but for that period, the arresting officer would have had to -- during the 48-hour period at the outset, that this Court discussed in Riverside, the probable cause for the arrest would be tested by a neutral magistrate.
 You also said that you thought this case is distinguishable on the legitimacy of taping the conversation with the police officer on the highway. Why -- why do you think this is distinguishable from the Washington Intermediate Appellate Court decision that the -- that the -- that Alford wanted to show to the police officer?
 Well, first of all, again, Justice Ginsburg, the Privacy Act issue is not one that we have raised before this Court. But -- but the reason that I would suggest it is distinguishable is that in a subsequent case considered by the Washington State Supreme Court called State v. Clark, the court look at Flora, the Intermediate Appellate Court case, and -- and termed it as a case that said you do not have a private conversation when it is open to passers-by. And in Flora, there was another individual present at the scene and who was, in fact, subsequently arrested for interfering with the arrest in the Flora case. So there is, all I'm suggesting, at least some grounds for distinguishing the Flora case for that reason.
 Do you know if there's been any instruction in the State of Washington to police following that Flora decision about taping -- about arresting people for taping conversations with police officers?
 I do believe there has, Your Honor. It's not a matter of record, however, in the -- against arresting for that reason.
 The flashing headlights which was -- there was a citation. There was an arrest for the tape recording and a citation for the flashing headlights. Could there have been a -- an arrest for the flashing headlights, or is that a lesser category of offense that's not an arrestable offense?
 Under Washington law, the flashing headlights, the wig-wag lights, in and of themselves would not be an arrestable offense. It would be a citable offense. The impersonating offense involved in this case would be arrestable, and the wig-wag headlights would play a part in that, however.
 But he was never -- never charged with the impersonating an officer, only with the flashing headlights. Is that right?
 That's correct.
 The -- the case, as far as I'm thinking of it at the moment, comes down to everybody is agreeing -- well, no. It's -- you go ahead because you want to reserve that probably.
 Thank you, Your Honor.
 Mr. Comey.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The validity of a police action under the Fourth Amendment turns upon an objective assessment of the facts viewed through the prism --
 Do the facts, on your view, have to be known to the officer?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Is -- is there -- and correct me if I'm wrong. In -- in cases in which we're inquiring into probable cause for a warrantless search, we give the government credit for any fact known to any officer, don't we?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Why wouldn't we have the same rule? Why shouldn't we have the same rule with respect to facts known to any officer when one officer makes an arrest?
 I suspect, Your Honor, that the Government would urge such a rule if it were at issue in case.
 But it's not urging it here.
 Well, I don't see it at -- at issue in this case, Your Honor.
 I don't think it is. I just want to know where we're going.
 That's -- that's correct, Your Honor. The -- the Government's position, as with the State of Washington's position, is that the -- the analysis is simply did the facts known to the officer, viewed through the prism of an objectively reasonable officer, establish probable cause. And that to make an evaluation of the arrest turn upon the officer's subjective assessment of those facts -- in other words, the working of his brain, the crunching of those facts that results in the spitting out of a legal conclusion -- is contrary to this Court's precedent and guts the objective reasonable test, and would make, instead, the validity of a Fourth Amendment action turn upon whether the officer is particularly smart, whether he's new, whether he's nervous, whether he says nothing at all or whether he decides to say, you're under arrest for everything listed in the Washington code book. Under those circumstances, the results would be different. The -- the concern that Your Honor raised about police officers engaging in a post hoc rationalization I respectfully suggest is not a concern that is rooted in reality because the facts continue to drive the analysis. Whether or not a police officer is right at the arrest scene in invoking a particular statute, if that turns out to be incorrect, it is still the facts that were known to him that must support probable cause for some other offense.
 So far as you know, there -- there are no empirical studies looking into this particular horrible?
 No, I'm not aware of any, Your Honor. I also suggest that if this were the concern that the Ninth Circuit were looking to address by the closely related offense doctrine, the remedy sweeps far too broadly in both directions. It punishes officers who at the scene engage in remarkable good faith conduct. I mean, these two police officers I think are what the public would hope these police officers were, looking at a code book at the roadside, calling a prosecutor late at night, trying to get it right. They are punished under this doctrine. Those that are rewarded are those who are smart enough, perhaps a veteran, perhaps someone who has read the Ninth Circuit's cases, to stay completely silent, to say nothing at all, knowing that he's going to be fine. He needs to engage in no --
 Mr. Comey, I think you rely, in part at least, on this Court's case in Whren --
 Yes, Your Honor.
 -- for the result for which you argue. But in Whren, the stated reason for the stop, traffic enforcement, was lawful, and we didn't have to look any further. In this case, the stated reason I think we assume, at least according to the trial judge's instruction to the jury, was unlawful. Does that impair the reliance on Whren?
 I don't believe it does, Your Honor. I believe that what Whren teaches is that the subjective working of the police officer's mind, his motives, his intentions, his legal assessments, as in other cases, his legal assessment with respect to the extent of a consent to search, or the reason he's boarding a boat, is irrelevant, that that's for courts to do. What matters is what came into an officer's brain, not what came out as a result of his working on it. Because, as I said, that would make law enforcement far from unevenhanded. It would make it depend upon who the officer was at the roadside on any given night. And those similarly situated would be treated very, very differently, depending upon what an officer chose to say. And as I said, silence in a -- in a jurisdiction that's governed by the closely related offense doctrine is the best course.
 But if -- if we had gone the other way in Whren, we would still have the problem that we have in this case, wouldn't we? Regardless of -- of how an arrest would be justified, the issue here is are the grounds of justification limited to the reason and in most cases the stated reason for the arrest. So we'd have this problem even if Whren had -- had come out otherwise, wouldn't we?
 I think we would still be discussing whether the subjective functioning of an officer's mind is relevant for Fourth Amendment purposes, which turns upon whether the action was reasonable in the case of an arrest --
 But the question here is the scope of the Fourth Amendment inquiry. Can it take in probable cause for reasons other than the reason for the arrest or the stated reason for the arrest? Can it consider other offenses, and we'd have that regardless of -- of Whren, wouldn't we?
 I think we would, Your Honor, to the extent that Whren is about motives and this case is about something very closely related, still the inner working of an officer's mind, what legal conclusion he draws from facts.
 Why is it subjective? I mean, in -- in Whren, the question was finding a hidden motive as distinguished from the motive that was written out. Here, there's nothing subjective about what the officer charged this person with on the spot. He told him. There wasn't anything hidden in his mind. He said, I'm arresting you for X reason, for tape recording. And then they had a whole colloquy. So what the -- what the arrest was for is as objective as it can be.
 I would suggest, Your Honor, that his speaking, his invocation of a particular code section is an objective manifestation of an essentially subjective process. And that's illustrated by imagining three stops on that road that night, three Mr. Alfords, exact same facts. In one, the officer is engaged in the process that he engaged in here. In the other two, the officer chooses in the first to say nothing, and in the third, to say -- hold up the code book and say what you did is in here. Everything in here applies to you, wise guy. Now get in the car. In those two other circumstances, complete silence and the table of contents approach, we wouldn't be here. These officers would not have been in litigation for 4 years. That to me demonstrates that it is essentially subjective because it is driven not by the facts, what the defendant did, but by the nature of the police officer. Is he clever? Has he gone to law school at night?
 But, of course, even in those examples, there could be a difference in what the police officer had actually observed. He might not have seen the safety sticker or the taillight or whatever it is. So you do have some inquiry into the mental processes of the officer in every case.
 Yes, Your Honor. And -- and if -- perhaps my distinction is -- is too homely, but I would say that's about what comes into his mind, into the brain, his senses. Did he see this taillight? Did he see the sticker? Not what comes out of his mouth as a result of the functioning of that brain, his legal brain. The legal work is for the courts looking at an arrest that's been challenged through the prism of an objectively reasonable officer. It does not depend, else Fourth Amendment seizures would be not reasonable, but would vary depending upon the skills of an individual officer from roadside to roadside. And that is utterly inconsistent with this Court's precedent and would, in fact, gut the objective reasonableness test. The Ninth Circuit's rule would lead to dramatically uneven law enforcement. It would, indeed, lead to either stacking or silence, and there's plenty of good reason why an officer or a Federal agent, who are not required to say anything at arrest, might want to inform a defendant of a basis for his arrest and might want to uphold other bases for an arrest, to protect a witness, for example. To drive police officers to the extremes is not in the public interest.
 You -- you predicted that this would be in practice very bad. There are some jurisdictions that have the closely related test, are there not?
 Yes, Your Honor. The Ninth Circuit.
 But the -- outside the Ninth Circuit.
 Yes, Your Honor. I believe the Seventh Circuit as well and the First Circuit.
 Do we know whether these horribles have occurred there, that the police are booking for everything?
 I do not, Your Honor. I -- I know with Federal agents, Federal agents say nothing. They're required to say nothing. They simply bring a defendant in on a warrantless arrest, cuff him, leave him in the cellblock, and then the assistant U.S. attorneys take the matter before a magistrate. So there is -- and that's one of the things that demonstrates the unworkability of this test because there are plenty of jurisdictions, thousands of Federal agents, who are under no obligation to say anything. And so it's hard to see how this test, even to the extent there were a concern about the evil or perceived evil of post hoc rationalization, which I suggest there isn't, this -- how this test would be applied --
 In -- in the Federal system, is the arrest based on what the officer knew and -- and see -- and saw at the time?
 Yes, Your Honor. His perceptions, the -- the facts known to the arresting officers.
 Suppose he had asked for a gun permit and he sees the gun permit, and he said, well, it's -- that's okay. You've got the permit, but I'm going to arrest you for reckless driving. Then he finds out the driving charge is no good. It can't stand. But then they look at his wallet more carefully and they see the permit is expired. What -- what rule then? At the police station, they -- they see the permit is expired. In other words, they find out a fact after -- after they arrested him.
 Well, I -- I would suspect that any statements made or seizures made pursuant to the arrest, which was made on facts known to the officers, that did not include what was in his wallet would be in jeopardy. That -- you still might be able to prosecute him, but you'd have to work awful hard to save anything you got as a result of that arrest.
 So you would confine the rule to what the officer has seen at the time of the arrest.
 Facts known to the officers, including facts known to officers with whom he or she is working. Thank you, Your Honor.
 Thank you, Mr. Comey. Mr. Phillips.
 Justice Stevens, may it please the Court: In essence, the closely related offense doctrine enforces the reasonableness clause by precluding officers from arresting someone for non-criminal conduct. At its core, that's what this is about. Mr. Alford was arrested for conduct that was not --
 Well, I thought at its core it was about this rule that the Ninth Circuit adopted about closely related offenses. I thought at its core that's what we were concerned with.
 Well, Your Honor, the closely related offense doctrine itself is -- it's in five circuits -- six depending on how you count the cases. But it's designed to -- to look at two things: number one, whether the arrest itself is reasonable; and number two, from a qualified immunity standpoint, whether -- essentially it's a no harm/no foul rule. If the conduct for which the person was arrested is criminal, but the officer merely has a mistake in terminology -- he calls it driving while license suspended instead of reckless driving -- then it actually salvages the arrest for law enforcement.
 Well, what if the arresting officer just doesn't give a reason for the arrest, just makes the arrest, and it turns out, at the end of the day, that indeed there were objective facts that would have justified an arrest. It wasn't what the officer had in mind but he didn't say anything. What result then?
 Your Honor, that -- that implicates several other rights. Number one, it is -- while an officer could, in some jurisdictions, effectuate a warrantless arrest without stating a basis therefor --
 Well, could -- could an arrest made under the circumstances I described be valid?
 I hate to say this, Your Honor, but it depends because at some point, for example, when the person is brought before the magistrate for the probable cause determination, they're not operating in a vacuum. There will have to be --
 No. At that time, there does. But we're talking about at the time of arrest. And it -- it just -- if the closely related offense doctrine has the effect of punishing an officer for explaining to the suspect a reason for the arrest, why is that a good doctrine? I mean, if the officer could say nothing and could end up, at the end of the day, having a valid arrest, I just think the closely related doctrine doesn't serve a very good purpose.
 Your Honor, the -- in this case, of course, that's -- that's not the -- that's not this case because the officer was very clear. He said exactly what it was for, and then he -- when he booked him, Officer Haner even booked him for illegal recording. So in this case, we're -- we're not presented with a vacuum. But even in an instance where the officer did not state at the instant of the arrest why he was arresting the person, one of the benefits of this doctrine is that it would allow for an objective review of the facts in order to determine --
 Well, if the objective review shows that there were, indeed, facts that would have justified an arrest, then what's wrong with allowing that to proceed?
 Your Honor, the -- the danger of that is that allowing this, as -- as I termed it, a general right of arrest with -- with no articulated basis at any point up until charging runs contrary to some of the basic principles --
 Okay. What's -- what's happening here is in order to avoid the down side of your test -- as Justice O'Connor puts it, her point is that if we adopt your rule, there's going to be an incentive not to state the reason. Now, in order to avoid that -- you haven't really squarely confronted it -- I think you're suggesting that there has to be an additional rule that the police officer must say why he's arrested, and -- and the authorities just don't establish that. Now, if you want us to go on and make up that rule, I suppose we could make up that rule.
 I'll be very happy if you --
 And I'm -- I'm sure you'd be delighted. But that's not the case we're confronted with. And if the choice is between making up a new rule to make your test work or rejecting your test, it seems to me that the -- that the latter might be the preferred course.
 Well, Your Honor, to sort of piggyback on what Justice Souter and what Justice Ginsburg had commented on, there's no empirical evidence to suggest that there is or would be a movement by police officers towards silence. There is simply nothing out there that says that police officers have in the past in the six jurisdictions, the six circuits that use this. There's no evidence that they have remained silent in an effort to --
 Must -- must be very stupid police officers. I mean, it's -- it's just obvious what -- what you have to do to make a valid arrest. If you say nothing, any -- any basis that you could have had for the arrest will -- will be used. Whereas, if you -- if you mention something, you better be able to substantiate that particular cause or a closely related crime. Police officers aren't any dumber than the rest of us. I can't believe that -- that that wouldn't be the -- the consequence of -- of the rule you're asking us to adopt.
 Your Honor --
 To put it this way, it seems to me the burden should be on you to -- to tell us why a police -- police officers are so stupid that they -- that they go around and -- and continue to give reasons when that's -- when that's going to make it more difficult for them to sustain the arrest and subject them to -- to personal liability.
 Well, for the most part, Justice Scalia, it does not come back to haunt the officers because the vast majority of arrests are lawful. The vast majority of officers have probable cause for the thing that they arrest the person for, and they arrest him for criminal conduct.
 But if they're told in this case that they're subject to 1983 liability out of their own pockets if they get it wrong, then it seems to me they would pursue the safe course and say nothing. I mean, you did say at one point in your brief that when a warrantless arrest is effected, the officer must inform the arrestee of the officer's authority and cause of arrest. But that's not true on the spot as a matter of Washington law or constitutional law, is it?
 The issue of -- of the constitutionality of that has never been ruled on by this Court. There are --
 Well, you're not urging that the Constitution requires the officer on the spot to state the cause of the arrest, or are you?
 Personally, Your Honor, I think that that would -- that would certainly comport more with the common law that was extant at the time the Constitution was --
 Well, regardless if it -- whether it comports with the common law, I don't see why the rule that you are urging, closely related, is going to make a dime's worth of difference unless ultimately we hold that there is an obligation to state the cause at the time of the arrest.
 Because, Your Honor, even if the -- even if the cause of the arrest is not stated at the time of the arrest, the person must be booked for something. There's a -- a report that's generated. In this instance --
 Okay. The booking occurs after arrest, and I thought what we were concerned with in this case was the validity of the arrest, not the booking.
 Correct, Your Honor.
 Okay. Now, if -- if the -- if the -- if it is the validity of arrest, which -- which is in issue, I don't see why your rule is going to make any difference in the long run unless we go the further step and say, in order to make this work, i.e., enforce Fourth Amendment values, at the time of the arrest the cause has got to be stated. Am -- am I missing something?
 Well, Your Honor, I would analogize it to the -- the arrest rule. Whether someone is or is not under arrest from a Fourth Amendment standpoint is based on an objective test, and it is viewed after the fact.
 Well, based on an objective test, we'll get absolutely nowhere. The person who is arrested is not in a position to be making objective or subjective assessments, by and large. He probably knows what he's being arrested for because it's obvious, but then we have cases like this, which are the only ones that are going to be litigated, and he may not know. The -- the fact still, it seems to me, is obvious. If we go your way, we're going to have to go the further step of requiring the cause to be stated. Isn't that, as a matter of common sense, true?
 It would certainly make it easier, but it's not necessary.
 All right. I'll be candid with you. I think it is necessary. But the -- I guess the -- what I'm getting at in all of this is you're asking us to take steps to solve a problem, and I don't think you've demonstrated what the problem is. We keep coming back, as we have several times, to the lack of empirical studies. Have we got something to worry about in -- in enforcing Fourth Amendment values that we can only guard against if we go your way?
 Well, Your Honor, I would say that the fact that there are six circuits that have adopted this policy shows that this is -- that this is a problem that occurs nationwide.
 Then what is the -- yes, but what's the justification for doing it? What is the practical problem that we are concerned with?
 The practical problem is that people are being arrested for conduct that is, at its base, not criminal.
 But they should have been arrested. I mean, so long as they should have been arrested, who cares? In this case, I mean, it'll -- it'll be ultimately be tried by a jury I -- I guess, but your -- your client pulls up behind another car with wig-wag lights flashing, like a police car. Right? He has a police scanner on the seat next to him. He has handcuffs. He has tinted glass in front of the license plate -- of his license plate, so it can't be -- can't be read. It seems to me there was obvious probable cause to -- to arrest this fellow for impersonating a police officer. And I would have hoped he would have been arrested so he wouldn't go around and -- and pull up behind another car. What is the problem?
 Well, Your Honor --
 It seems to me he should have been arrested, and the -- and the mere fact that the police officer gave the wrong reason for arresting him doesn't make me feel very bad about the arrest at all. I'm glad he was arrested.
 I'm going to disagree on two points. First, at the trial court, the State did not argue that he could have been arrested for other crimes. The jury was never instructed on the elements of these supposed other crimes. And we pointed that out in the appeal in the reply brief.
 Yes, but did you object to the instructions in the trial court?
 No, Your Honor, because the --
 One of the problems I have with the case, very frankly, is that the jury has already ruled against your client on the qualified immunity issue carrying out instructions given by the judge that were not objected to by your client.
 That's correct, Your Honor, but the only instructions that were given regarding -- regarding what they needed to find to find a violation were the Privacy Act instructions.
 But whose fault is that?
 Well, Your Honor, I think if the State wanted them to -- qualified immunity is an affirmative defense. If they wanted the State to find -- if they wanted the jury to find there was impersonation, they should have requested an instruction on that because impersonation in Washington requires more than simply taking an action that creates an impression that you're an officer. It also -- under first degree, there has to be specific intent to defraud someone, and here the only thing he did, he gave them a flashlight and helped them jack up their car. On the issue of the wig-wag headlights, the transcript shows that the officer spent a minute or 2, by his own estimation, on the scene behind Mr. Alford's car, saw no wig-wag headlights. And as for the scanner, the -- the transcript, page 246 -- he admitted at trial it was actually a ham radio, not a portable police scanner.
 But I thought that the reason that the police went after your client after he left the vehicle that was disabled was because the officers at that point suspected that he might be impersonating a police officer. That's what the people in the -- the disabled vehicle told the officer. They said he had flashing headlights. We thought he was a police officer. And -- and wasn't the original following of your client triggered by the suspicion that he might be impersonating a police officer?
 Yes, Your Honor, and that -- that -- we have not argued that there was not suspicion sufficient to -- to have a stop to do investigation. However, under the Washington statute, there was not evidence sufficient to show probable cause that there was an actual crime --
 Under Washington law, is it lawful for your client to have headlights -- wig-wag lights?
 No, Your Honor. It is a traffic violation. That is a non-arrestable offense, and that was admitted at court and also here today.
 Was your client ever found guilty of any offense at all?
 No, Your Honor. Even the traffic infraction was dismissed by the judge.
 But it's unlawful to have wig wag lights, and I take it it's an arrestable offense to impersonate a police officer.
 Yes, Your Honor, but that --
 So that would -- that would certainly be probable cause to arrest just based on the wig-wag, plus the fact he lied to the police in -- in instructing them the button to push or didn't tell them what button to push to make them go.
 No, Your Honor. The obstruction charge also under Washington law -- under the case law interpreting the statute, there has to not only be the -- the hindrance or obstruction. There has to be specific intent, and there has to be obstruction in fact. And in this case, both of the officers testified that they -- that he pushed every button they asked him to. He opened the hood for them. He let them look at the -- the flasher unit. He showed them the manual. They both say that they saw this button that after the arrest they pushed -- one of them pushed. However, there's obviously no obstruction in fact if -- one of them actually said at trial that he didn't ask him to push the button because he wanted to see whether he would push it or not. So there's no -- again, there's no facts to support a finding of probable cause even on the obstruction because the officers were essentially just letting him hang himself.
 Well, that -- that isn't the issue before us here. I -- I assume that for purposes of the question on which we granted certiorari, we have to assume, or else the whole thing doesn't make any sense and it's all -- it's all arguing about nothing -- we have to assume that there was probable cause on some other ground than the ground which he stated or anything closely related to the ground which -- which the officer stated. Isn't that -- isn't that the -- the manner in which this case gets to us?
 Your Honor, we raised the issue at the Ninth Circuit that there had been no evidence put forward on the other crimes. And we pointed out that even the deputy prosecuting attorney -- and in fact, even in closing argument, when they addressed the -- the wig-wag headlights, et cetera, they stated specifically that that information went to what they called his intent to unlawfully record.
 But -- but that's not the ground on which the Ninth Circuit decided it. The Ninth Circuit never had to reach the question of whether there was probable cause on these other grounds --
 Correct, Your Honor.
 -- because it found, even if there was these other grounds, they're not closely related to the illegal taping. So I suppose you're telling us that if we find that we do not like the closely related rule, that it's not part of -- of United States constitutional law, what we should do is remand to the Ninth Circuit so that they could determine whether there was probable cause on the other grounds.
 That's exactly right, Your Honor. And in -- in looking at this -- this probable cause determination and the reasonableness requirement of the Fourth Amendment, the qualified immunity, of course, was a doctrine that was advanced by the Court to address specific problems. None of those problems are impacted in any way by the closely related offense, this subset of qualified immunity cases.
 May I ask one other question about the proceedings in the trial court?
 Yes, sir.
 Was there a motion for summary judgment by the defendants claiming, as a matter of law, they should be entitled to qualified --
 Yes, sir.
 And that was overruled.
 That was denied, yes.
 And then there was a jury trial and the jury disagreed with it and, in effect, said there -- there was basis for qualified immunity.
 Yes. Yes, Justice Stevens. And the -- in reviewing the transcript and in reviewing the -- the instructions and the ruling on the summary judgment motion, the reason that Senior Judge Bryan did not rule on the qualified immunity was twofold. One, at the time of the summary judgment motion, one of the officers was -- well, was lying about having contacted the prosecutor prior to making the arrest, and he noted in his order that there was a factual dispute. So summary judgment wasn't appropriate. And second, Judge Bryan indicated that essentially there was a problem created by the Saucier opinion because he felt that it was somehow possible that there could have been an arrest effectuated without probable cause, but that there was a reasonable mistake on the part of the officers. So this did not proceed to the jury on the -- on this closely related offense doctrine. It didn't proceed on there were these other crimes for which probable cause existed, but on this broad standard of good faith and reasonable mistake.
 What is your understanding of the reason for the jury's verdict on this issue?
 I almost hate to say it, Your Honor, but I believe it was a lack of sympathy. That -- that is my -- much like with Justice Scalia, I believe they -- they looked at the -- the circumstances and even though there was not probable cause to have arrested him, they came to the conclusion we don't like Mr. Alford. We're not going to find for him.
 May I ask one other question then too?
 That's not my reason. I don't even know the man. I'm just -- (Laughter.)
 In -- in your view is the closely related doctrine a -- a matter of closely related as a matter of law between two different offenses or is it a matter of -- are the facts relevant? For example, could one argue that these offenses were factually related pretty closely because they grew out of the same central group of facts?
 In our brief, Your Honor, I often used the phrase same conduct test because in amalgamating the six different circuits, that appeared to be the most consistent test and the one that's most consistent with the objective standard and with the reasonableness standard, that if -- and I, again, go to the no harm/no foul. If you're engaging in conduct that would have and should have led to your arrest, if it's the same conduct for which you were arrested and it's simply misnamed, then there essentially is no harm of constitutional magnitude. But otherwise --
 Well, then you have a very narrow view of closely related. It comes down to misnomer cases. It's one thing to say -- what the officers told the DA, although after they arrested him -- didn't they describe the whole episode from when they saw Alford pull up behind the disabled vehicle? They described that and they mentioned the flashing lights. They described the whole episode up till the point where they -- the officers apprehended him and saw the equipment and then noticed -- they told the DA everything, and he said, yes, you have probable cause.
 They did describe the entire episode to him, Justice Ginsburg.
 So why couldn't it be related in time and space rather than legally related?
 Well, I'm not urging something as narrow as -- as a semi-Blockburger test. But here you have essentially two discrete conducts that were being examined by the officers: number one, the actions surrounding the headlights; and number two, the actions surrounding the taping. And the trial -- I mean, it was very clear that the two were treated as discrete incidents by the police. At the moment Devenpeck saw the tape recorder -- and he testified at trial. When I saw the recorder in the record mode and saw that it was moving, that's what he stated to him constituted probable cause for the arrest. The moment he saw that tape recorder and saw the play and record buttons were pushed, he informed Mr. Alford, you're under arrest for making an illegal tape recording. So when looking at whether something is -- is sufficiently related or not, obviously there's going to have to be more than a modicum of logic that's used, but objectively this separates rather nicely into two discrete incidents for the analysis.
 Why -- why is it exactly that a policeman who comes on a difficult scene, gun in one pocket, the guy has a knife in another, and he throws a punch? Now, the policeman might make a mistake about that. He -- he thought he threw a punch, but he made a mistake. Now -- now, why is a policeman less likely to make that kind of a mistake than make a mistake about what crime to label it?
 Well, Your Honor, we're not concerned so much -- this doctrine is not concerned so much with what to label the crime.
 No, no. You said -- you -- you say everybody agrees in this case that if the policeman had reasonable cause objectively to arrest the person for A, but he arrested him for B instead, there are some circumstances in which that's okay. And on their view, it's -- as long as -- it was always okay, really, as long as objectively there was reasonable cause. On your view, you're going to add a little thing. You're going to add, and by the way, it's not okay unless that conduct that he looked at was in fact illegal. So you say -- because policemen could make mistakes about labels, but they're not likely to make mistakes about throwing a punch. So I just wondered why not. I mean, they got the wrong guy for throwing the punch. You know, so -- so what? Why is that so -- that -- that supposedly in your view is some terrible constitutional harm, but if he just mislabels it, it's not a terrible constitutional harm. And I'm just puzzled as to where that distinction comes from and why.
 Well, Your Honor, the distinction in -- in this particular case and the distinctions in the -- in the cases that run the gamut around the circuits generally show one thing that we --
 -- that the circuits all agree with you. Now, my only problem is it's hard for me to see why they all agree with you. (Laughter.)
 And -- and that's where I'm sort of stuck.
 Your Honor, if we start with first principles, and the first principle that underlies this case is there is, from the framing area -- era, a general mistrust of warrantless arrests. From that, we step to the reasonableness clause. From the reasonableness clause, we then step to this judicially created qualified immunity, which subsumed the good faith analysis. So what we find is we're stepping further and further away from the original principle. And the -- on the original principles, he was arrested without a warrant. Wrong. Under the Constitution we have reasonableness. Okay. He's arrested. Was it a reasonable arrest? The court has said we generally say that if an arrest has probable cause, then it's reasonable unless there are these exigent circumstances, excessive force, et cetera. Then under qualified immunity, it's even a step more attenuated, that even though there might not have been probable cause, if there was arguable probable cause, then there would be a violation, but no one is going to be liable for it.
 Yes, but Mr. Phillips, let me go back first principles. You are complaining about an arrest which you admit was valid. Do you not -- do -- do you not that the arrest was supported by probable cause and therefore was a valid arrest?
 In this instance, Your Honor?
 Yes.
 Certainly not.
 Oh, I misunderstood. I thought we were just talking about qualified immunity. But you challenge the arrest itself even though you admit there was probable cause for the arrest?
 No, Your Honor, because we don't feel that there was probable cause for the arrest.
 We don't that challenge that here, though. I asked you that question earlier, and I thought you agreed that for purposes of our deciding this case, we -- we will assume, though you do not concede the point, that there was probable cause on one of the other grounds.
 That in order to address the Ninth Circuit's holding --
 Exactly, exactly.
 And -- and there's no need for the Ninth Circuit's rule unless there was probable cause because if there was no probable cause, you win on that ground. You don't have to get into this closely related offense doctrine. Is that correct?
 If there was probable cause --
 No. If there was no probable cause.
 Oh, correct. If there was no probable cause for --
 Then you win without this fancy doctrine.
 That's -- that is correct, Your Honor, and that was --
 This -- this doctrine only comes into play and is only required in cases involving a valid arrest and a -- a mistake by the officer in identifying the wrong cause for the arrest. So it's an extension of the qualified -- it's a -- it's a -- an application of the qualified immunity doctrine to say you are not protected even though you acted lawfully.
 Well, because it actually -- to turn it back around, you're not protected because you did not act lawfully. You did not act lawfully because --
 No, but if you say the arrest was valid, he did act lawfully although we didn't realize the reason why he did.
 Your Honor, the cases that have examined this doctrine have -- have looked at it as sort of straddling the Fourth Amendment and the qualified immunity analysis.
 But -- but don't you reconcile the -- the problem of the straddle by saying that unless the probable cause, which we will assume existed, is for a closely related offense, the whole arrest was invalid?Isn't that your position?
 Correct. Unreasonable.
 Okay. Now, let me ask you -- you one other question. You -- you started out in getting down to first principles with disfavor of warrantless arrests. Would your position be different if the officer had somehow gotten an arrest warrant on the spot for illegal taping? Wouldn't you be making the same argument?
 Certainly, Your Honor, and there we would --
 So it has nothing to do, essentially, with warrantless or nonwarrantless arrests.
 Well, in this case it does, but had there been a warrant --
 Well, in this -- yes, but on your theory, that is -- that is incidental. That is not essential. If he had had an arrest warrant for illegal taping, you'd be making the same argument.
 That there was no probable cause for the arrest.
 That's -- that's right.
 Correct, Your Honor.
 Yes.
 And I think that that -- of course, that -- as we point out in our brief, there's support for that, that historically the warrant must show the reason that someone is being arrested. So as we pointed out, there's this -- an odd --
 Well, you don't have any case law to cite to us for that. That gets us into a whole new doctrine.
 Well, Your Honor, I think one of the most fundamental principles that we can look at on showing the reason why you're being arrested is the great writ of habeas corpus where, in order to hold someone, they must show why he is being held.
 But you've already conceded that it -- Washington law doesn't require the officer on the spot to say why he's making the arrest and that there's no decision of this Court or any court that I know that said the Constitution requires the officer on the spot to give a reason.
 That's correct, Your Honor. So what we have posited and what the Ninth Circuit -- what they did in the Gasho case, for example, is after the fact you can look at the actions that were taken by the officers, the booking sheet, et cetera, to give you some objectively verifiable evidence of the cause for the arrest. And really what it's looking at is there needs to be a nexus between conduct and arrest, and --
 Thank you, Mr. Phillips. Ms. Hart, you have 5 -- 5 minutes.
 I think I'd only like to make one point, Your Honors, and that is that the Fourth Amendment does not make the validity of arrest a game that the government loses even when there's probable cause for arrest, but the closely related offense doctrine does. And for that reason, it should be rejected and we respectfully ask the Court to reverse the decision of the Ninth Circuit.
 Thank you, Ms. Hart. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument in the case of Pasquantino against the United States. Ms. Brill.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: There are five primary reasons why this prosecution is outside the scope of anything Congress has authorized. First, the government's interpretation of the wire fraud statute is inconsistent with the revenue rule. Second, it turns the rule of lenity on its head by allowing the Government to incarcerate petitioners for 57 months for conduct that has never given rise to civil liability in this country. Third, this prosecution contravenes our national policy of demanding reciprocity in matters of international tax enforcement. Fourth, the Government acknowledged below that it cannot bring this prosecution without disregarding another act of Congress, the Mandatory Victims Restitution Act, which is, as the name specifies, mandatory. And, fifth, under this Court's decisions in McNally and Cleveland, the wire fraud statute applies only to schemes aimed at defrauding a victim into relinquishing something that it holds as money or property. A sovereign's interest in an unassessed tax claim is neither money nor property.
 Well, can you look at the interest of the Government as one of not allowing U.S. territory to be used to carry out a smuggling scheme? I mean, why does it have to be viewed as one of trying to enforce some other nation's tax laws?
 Justice O'Connor, the government's interest in prosecuting somebody does not define the scope of what the statute at issue proscribes.
 It's a wire fraud statute dealing with the use of communications capacity in this country to carry out a scheme designed to enable smuggling of goods.
 Well, if the -- if the statute was not written as it is -- the statute, as written, uses the words "defraud" and the word -- the word "property," and both of those terms are terms that this Court has defined very narrowly. In Nader, it defined a "fraud" as --
 Ms. Brill, I thought your brief said that we have an anti-smuggling statute, which is directed precisely against smugglers, but it only applies to those countries that have similar protection for us.
 Yes, Justice --
 And Canada does not.
 Yes, Justice Scalia, that's exactly correct.
 The existence of that statute would seem to suggest -- and a statute which is limited to countries that will do the same for us -- would seem to suggest that we don't want to do this for Canada.
 Yes, that's exactly -- that's exactly right, Your Honor. There --
 But it's also limited to vessels. It's smuggling by water, not smuggling by --
 By automobile.
 -- vehicles, as was done here, so that we don't have any statute that covers smuggling on land.
 Right. Yes, Your Honor, that's correct.
 Is there something better about reciprocity for vessels and not reciprocity for land smuggling?
 I think it just evinces what Congress was concerned about most at the time, Justice Scalia, but it was -- it is certainly the case that in any -- any time that this country has endeavored to deal with matters of international tax enforcement, it has always demanded reciprocity. It has done so through the smuggling statute, it has done so through the numerous tax treaties that the Second Circuit's RJR decision discusses at length. And one of the points the RJR decision makes is that, in 1951, at the very time that Congress was looking at the wire fraud statute and enacting it, the Senate was, at the same time, becoming concerned that this country had gone too far in extending reciprocity in connection with its tax treaties and was actually evincing a policy of cutting back on the degree to which we would assist other countries in tax enforcement. And so the issue is to look at -- that the revenue rule must be used as a background principle of common law against which -- against which the revenue -- excuse me, against which the wire fraud statute is --
 Well, if we don't view this case as involving some attempt to indirectly enforce Canada's tax laws -- suppose we don't view it with that lens -- then does that put it outside the so-called revenue --
 Well, if it were not -- if it did not serve the function -- it doesn't matter what the government's intent is and what is in the mind of the prosecutor, but if it did not have any effect of enforcing a foreign government's revenue rule, then, yes, it would be outside; but there are numerous ways in which this prosecution does enforce a foreign government's revenue rule. Certainly, it deters future violations. The sentence was based on the -- an estimate of the intended loss, and there was no assessment or an adjudication in Canada to determine what the amount was that was owed. And so the District Court became, essentially, part of the tax enforcement apparatus of the Government of Canada by performing that assessment in the first instance. And so anytime that we impose criminal or civil liability in a manner that affects the tax policies of another country, we are enforcing that rule. If we -- whether we're requiring compliance with the -- with the tax rule of a foreign country or punishing noncompliance. All of those --
 Is the rationale for the rule that enforcement of taxes is so unpopular that we want to minimize the exposure to -- of our judges so that they -- the only thing they have to do is enforce taxes that -- that are paid to our own Government? I'm serious about that. Is that the rationale?
 Well, I think there's a certain amount of self-protection in some of the decision -- decisions, surely; but the real -- the underlying purpose of the revenue rule is a recognition that foreign -- that taxes, in general, are a matter of policy. They're inherently policy-based; they're not based on contract or other kinds of commerce. They do not -- they do not assist in resolving disputes between private parties. And often they're imposed -- especially customs duties, are imposed to disadvantage other countries, and so the courts have said these are a peculiar type of law, they serve only the interest of the -- of the foreign sovereign, and there's a particular -- there's been a particular sensitivity about scrutinizing those foreign laws, potentially declaring them invalid under the foreign governments' own laws or pursuant to our own Constitution. And so revenue rules have historically been a categorical exclusion to general principles of comity through which we might otherwise recognize foreign laws or foreign judgments. And the rule has come to be so entrenched, and has been so well established, that there's a whole body of background law in the tax treatise of our country, and of many other countries, that is based on our non-recognition and our non-enforcement of foreign revenue laws. So --
 But if we did -- if we did enforce even a tax judgment of another country, there would be no U.S. law that would be violated. You're talking about a common law, no country enforces the taxes of another. But, at least in the Restatement of Foreign Relations now, that's put in terms of -- there's no requirement that any country enforce the tax claims or judgments of another; but neither is there any prohibition.
 Well, Justice Ginsburg, the current restatement is worded in -- addresses judgment specifically. It does not -- it doesn't address un-adjudicated tax codes. But there's always been a much greater suspicion, a much greater reluctance, to get into enforcing a claim brought by a foreign country, where that country's own processes have not been allowed to run their course and to have the initial determination. There -- the restate -- the second Restatement of Foreign Relations law, which is -- was -- came out in 1965 and is closer to reflecting what the law was at the time Congress enacted the wire fraud statute, says, in Section 41, Comment L, "Under the -- under the foreign relations law of the United States, courts in the United States will generally refrain from taking action to give effect to the penal or revenue laws of other states, except as provided by international agreement." And so that -- that was a statement by the -- by the propounders of the -- of the Restatement of what they -- what they believed the law was at the time. To the extent it's qualified, I think it's just to leave room for the fact that the Senate can promulgate treaties, or Congress can, by statute, command that courts recognize these laws. But it's --
 You don't -- you don't assert that this -- that it -- that this couldn't be done. You just --
 Not that --
 -- assert that we shouldn't interpret this statute to have done it.
 Exactly, Justice Scalia. If Congress had written a different wire fraud statute that had said, "You can't have a scheme to defraud the revenue, whether foreign or domestic," that would have been a clear statement abrogating the revenue rule. But we don't have any such clear statement, and the terms -- the terms "defraud" and the terms "property" have to be read with the background rule in mind.
 May I --
 But you would come to that conclusion even if we had a reciprocal enforcement agreement. If this were Country X, where we did have a reciprocal enforcement agreement, you'd come to the same conclusion, no prosecution under this statute.
 Correct, Your Honor, because there wouldn't -- this statute wouldn't have been written to take that into account. This --
 So, in a sense, the revenue position is irrelevant to your -- to your secondary or your -- or your independent argument on statutory construction. The revenue rule is irrelevant to it.
 As to just whether an unassessed tax claim --
 Yes.
 -- is property, the revenue rule -- the revenue rule adds a boost to it, but there are two -- there are two dimensions to the property element. One is that, as I said -- and if a -- if a tax claim is not -- has not been subject to an assessment, that whatever interest the Government may have in that is not in the nature of property; it is simply in the nature of law-enforcement power to collect. They -- some of these revenue rule cases talk about the power to --
 So tax revenues are not property, in your view?
 Once a tax is collected, once the Government actually has money in its hands, and if there's a scheme to, let's say, obtain an illegal refund through a tax and -- that would be a scheme to deprive a government body of money. But a scheme to merely evade paying a tax is not something that falls within the statute, separate and apart from the revenue rule. But the revenue rule -- as a result of the revenue rule, it is also the case that no state court would have recognized any property interest in a foreign sovereign, even if it had reached the point of a judgment. And so it works in both ways. The --
 May I ask you, Ms. Brill, something that puzzled me about this case? It is a rather peculiar use of our wire fraud statute. Are there any proceedings going on in Canada? Has there been any attempt to extradite these people?
 Justice Ginsburg, there was an indictment that Canada issued against the Petitioners. It has charges under -- for smuggling, under Canadian law, which is Customs Act, Section 159. It charges unlawful possession of imported spirits under Excise Act 163(1)(b), disposing of goods illegally imported, in violation of Customs Act, Section 155. So Canada has its own process. There has -- there has not been, to my knowledge, any request by Canada for extradition, but the treaty between the United States and Canada does include revenue violations, and --
 Presumably, if we punish this person this way, Canada wouldn't -- there's no double jeopardy, right?
 That's correct.
 So we'd be punishing this person for violating Canadian law, and then Canada would punish this person for violating Canadian law.
 Yes, I haven't looked in detail at the statute of limitations provisions, but that could be the effect. And we could be punishing them much more severely than Canada would be. They have their own means of balancing what they think the appropriate balance is for these things, and certainly the wire fraud statute, 57 months in our --
 Well, I think the Government has an interest in saying, "Look, if you're going to smuggle, have your scheme up there in Canada; don't use our wire systems for fraudulent purposes. We don't like that here."
 And if they want to pass a law that says that, because of the -- because there's a domestic --
 Well, they -- of course, they say that this covers it, and it seems to me that really the -- that turns on the definition of "property" --
 Okay.
 -- which is an arguable point.
 What if the -- instead of a wire fraud case, it was assault and battery? Supposing the Canadian revenue agent got inside of New York and one of your clients beat him up, would we have -- solely because he was mad at him for trying to interfere with his attempt to smuggle into Canada -- would we have to say that you can't do that, we have no jurisdiction over the assault and battery?
 No, Justice Stevens. It's -- the question is whether you're --
 The only purpose would be just what the purpose is here, they're trying to facilitate the smuggling operation.
 Well, the assault and battery -- whatever the assault and battery provisions are, you would be bringing the prosecution solely for that purpose; it does not have any -- the effect of applying the assault and battery statute, if there was one --
 Is to interfere with Canadian's collection of their taxes. That's the only reason for it.
 Well, I think it -- in that case, it would be -- it would be far too attenuated to reach that conclusion. There could be -- the motive of a person --
 Why is that any more attenuated than a conspiracy carried out down here in Maryland using American assets to do the evil deed in Canada?
 Well, the motive of the person performing the assault and battery would be irrelevant to the prosecution. It's whether they intended to do the improper touching and, in fact, carried it out.
 Well, why isn't the motive irrelevant here? We don't want our facilities to be used for criminal activity.
 The question is whether --
 Any more than in the -- in the hypothetical we don't want citizens beaten up on our soil.
 Justice Kennedy, the issue is whether -- is what Congress had in mind in enacting the wire fraud statute. And, in general, we presume that Congress had domestic concerns in mind, not that we have incorporated vast bodies of --
 Well, but it used broad language, "Any scheme to defraud by means of wire communications in interstate or foreign commerce."
 The wire -- it is -- the wire communications may be an interstate or foreign commerce, the word "any" modifies "any scheme or artifice to defraud" --
 This statute applied against people who defraud the United States Government in taxes?
 Your Honor, the government's position on that, I believe, is somewhat inconsistent. The tax -- the tax division and the Department of Justice U.S. Attorneys manual specifies that it is -- they believe it is the intent of Congress that tax matters will be dealt with through the internal revenue code, not through other means. There are -- there have been some prosecutions brought in the case of an illegal -- an illegal tax shelter, where there is truly an -- a private party who is defrauded into giving up money in connection with --
 But you don't -- you don't know of any prosecutions under this fraud statute for depriving the Federal Government of property.
 Well, the Henderson case, which we have cited in our reply brief, is one from the Southern District of New York, where Judge Weinfeld said, when faced with a mail fraud prosecution of that type, this is outside the scope of anything that Congress intended. The -- I would like to get back to the issue of money or property so that it -- to have it conceptually why an unassessed tax claim is not money or property. There is no allegation that -- in the indictment or anywhere -- that the petitioners took any money out of Canada's treasury. So money is not an issue. At most, it was an effort to evade Canada's right to collect money, not any money it had --
 You could say the same thing if it were a building fraud. Suppose there were contractors building a Canadian building for the Canadian Government and they had a big fraud scheme down here, and it was to deprive the Canadian Government of money? I think the statute would clearly apply.
 The statute only applies -- what McNally said is, any assistance a governmental body obtains from the statute must be in the capacity of property-holder. And so the -- a scheme to defraud somebody out of their -- out of a building, that's traditional property. There's not -- it is not the same thing. Let's have an -- let's take an example of an interference with prospective economic advantage. So there is a defendant who says to somebody else who's about to get a contract -- I know my competitor is about to get a contract, and I say, "Why don't you go out of town? There's a -- there's a much bigger contract that you can get if you fly to Michigan." And, meanwhile, I go in, and I usurp the contract and take it for my own purposes. Well, I've interfered with that person's prospective economic advantage, and so there would be a tort, and the person could collect from me. But I have not taken any money or property from that person that was in his possession. And what McNally and Cleveland point us to is whether there was money or property in the hands of the -- of the victim. And Canada's interest -- until there has been an assessment, Canada's interest is purely that of a -- of a sovereign. It is -- it does not have a claim to any money that is in the bank account of somebody who owes it a debt. And the Johnston case, which we've cited in our reply brief, Your Honor, talks about -- this Court talked about a statute in which there was a boxing promoter who collected fees for the boxing match and also collected taxes at the same time. And the U.S. Government could not bring an embezzlement action against that person for not paying the taxes, because those taxes were not -- were not yet anything that qualified as governmental property.
 Ms. Brill, in the Court of Appeals, they treated the argument that this was not property as entirely separate from the revenue rule question. And I thought your petition for cert was confined to the first question.
 Well, Your Honor -- no, Your Honor, we talked about both in the petition for cert. And in the question --
 But the question, itself, doesn't refer to the property issue.
 It talks about the --
 Was it -- was it phrased the same way it is in your brief, in the petition?
 Yes. Yes, the --
 Well, then the last part of it --
 Right, but --
 -- obviously covers it.
 Yes, the last part talks about --
 Oh, I see. I'm sorry, you're right. Yeah.
 Yes, okay. But to return -- to return to the revenue rule -- and thank you, Justice Stevens, for bringing me back to that -- the Government has acknowledged that there can be no restitution here. And that's in -- that's in the joint appendix, at page 106. They expressly waived it. They said that even if there was a foreign judgment that Canada was trying to bring here, that would be unenforceable. There could be no RICO actions, because that's unenforceable; and no proxy suits on behalf of a foreign government. And so the only thing that they say is, beyond -- is not included -- the only act of enforcement which they say is not included is, somehow, criminal enforcement. And under Section 14 of the -- excuse me, under the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution, Congress has power to enforce that amendment, and it has done so both in enacting statutes for civil recovery, as well as criminal recovery -- criminal punishment, excuse me. And so it's -- the notion that somehow incarcerating someone is not -- is not punishment is not something that makes much sense in that context. The decisions of this Court have held that penalties are -- monetary penalties count as punishment, and also that injunctions are -- fall within the scope of the revenue rule. That's in the Wisconsin versus Pelican Insurance case, which actually addresses the penal -- the penal rule, which is the close corollary.
 May I ask you, when -- now that we're getting into money, one of the things that the sentencing court had to do was to find out how much of a loss there was, and that involved determining what taxes would be due under Canadian law. And did that increase the sentence? Did the -- did the sentence vary with the amount of taxes that they -- we found due?
 Yes, Justice Ginsburg, it very much did. The loss calculation was based on intended loss, and so they -- what the District Court judge did was estimated the number of cases of liquor that were intended to be brought into Canada, and applied that number to the amount of the tax that Canada, he believed, would have applied to that -- to that amount. And that ended up changing the sentence from six months to, in the case of the Pasquantino brothers, 57 months, and the -- and, in the case of Mr. Hilts, 21 months. So the bulk of the sentence was based on the Canadian tax law and our courts making that assessment.
 A judge making that assessment.
 The judge made the sentence -- made the assessment at sentencing, yes. What the -- what the -- what the Government did in this case was to submit, very self-consciously, all of the issues of Canadian tax law to the jury. And the Assistant U.S. Attorney said this to the Fourth Circuit en banc panel several times, that they were presenting these matters of Canadian tax law as factual issues for the jury to find. But, ultimately, in sentencing, it was -- it was the court that ended up imposing and elevating that sentence. If there aren't further questions, I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
 Mr. Dreeben.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: A prosecution for wire fraud based on defrauding a foreign government of taxes serves at least four distinct United States prosecutorial interests. The first is that the creation of schemes to defraud frequently spawns collateral criminal conduct in the United States above and beyond the fraudulent scheme itself. Here, for example, one of the defendants was charged in the indictment with using a gun in relation to the charged wire fraud scheme. Second --
 Where? Using a gun where?
 In the United States, Justice Ginsburg.
 Well, why didn't you prosecute him for that?
 That crime depended upon the validity of the wire fraud charges, because the crime was use of a gun during in relation to this wire fraud scheme.
 But that really doesn't get you anywhere, does it? I mean, if the United States says, "We don't want this gun offense to be prosecuted unless there's a wire fraud prosecution," that doesn't tell you anything as to whether there ought to be a wire fraud prosecution.
 Well, what it tells you, Justice Souter, is why the United States has an interest in enforcing a law that facially is written to cover schemes to defraud that are carried out using the United States wires.
 But that's -- but that's a reason for extending the statute to everything, to everything --
 No, Justice Scalia --
 -- reading "property" to mean anything at all. I mean, what you're saying is, the broader you read this statute, the more bad guys we're going to catch. I'll stipulate that. Of course it's true.
 Well, Justice Scalia, I'm starting from the proposition that the language of the wire fraud statute textually applies to this scheme, and Petitioner's argument is that, because of the common law revenue rule, the statute should be read to exclude schemes to defraud a foreign government of tax revenue. And the fact that a foreign government is defrauded of tax revenue does not mean that the United States does not have an independent interest in rooting out that scheme and prosecuting it. In addition to the collateral criminal conduct that such schemes can spawn, the creation of such schemes indicates a criminal mind and a criminal group that can turn its techniques for used -- using to smuggle into Canada, also to smuggle back into the United States or to victimize other victims in the United States.
 What about evading a Cuban tax law that we think -- that many people would think is an unjust tax law? I mean, one of the things I'm worried about is that this gets us into foreign policy. Are you sure that we always want to enforce the tax laws of foreign countries through this fraud statute, no matter what those tax laws happen to be?
 The United States has prosecutorial discretion to determine when to invoke the statute and in what interests it should be served.
 It may well, but when it comes here, this Court is going to have to decide -- we'll just approve whatever you want to prosecute and let you not prosecute whatever you want?
 There is no provision in the statute, Justice Scalia, for this Court to second-guess foreign-policy determinations that are made --
 Well, not just foreign policy. The White Russians come here because they don't want to pay Lenin's taxes designed to equalize all individuals, in terms of property. Country A has a tax law that makes everybody a criminal because nobody really ever pays all the taxes. Country C has a set of laws that tax bibles. Country D has a -- I mean, you know, we can spin out the examples endlessly, and they're not farfetched. So take all the arguments from last week, called "any court arguments," cross- -- or two days ago -- just let's cross-reference them. The problem is complexity of tax law. The problem is many, many, many would be contrary to American policy. And the problem is, nobody really knows what they are; indeed, they don't even know what American tax law is, no single individual, I suspect. Let's put in Italy, France, Byelorussia, Belarus, Ukraine, Saudi Arabia, and 35,000 others. Everybody becomes a criminal. And then we say, "Don't worry, we'll only prosecute the real bad ones." That's the argument, I think, on the other side, and I'd like to hear your response.
 Justice Breyer, I don't think there's any reason to assume that everyone becomes a criminal. What this --
 No, only people who come over here because they don't want to pay taxes in those countries. Sometimes we would agree with them --
 Justice Breyer, in order to violate the wire fraud statute, you have to use deception in order to deprive another --
 Yes, they don't tell Lenin that they're coming --
 Well, that wouldn't involve the use of the United States wires --
 -- and they write to each other. They have a cousin, in Brooklyn, who forwards them the money to get out.
 Justice Breyer, if one stipulates that that violates the wire fraud statute or that there's enough conduct that does, the question still comes down to whether the United States chooses to prosecute that case. This is not a --
 The question comes down to whether this statute, which doesn't have to be read that way, ought to be read that way, whether it makes sense to read it that way. What about -- does Canada have an income tax?
 I'm not sure of Canadian tax law.
 Well, let's assume --
 In the context of this case --
 -- Canada has an income tax. Would you -- would you prosecute a Canadian who files a deceptive Canadian income tax return?
 Not for using Canadian facilities to do so.
 No, no, no, from this country. He's -- you know, he's a snow goose and is in Florida when he files his return.
 He files it electronically.
 Yeah.
 The wire fraud statute is applicable to schemes to defraud, generally speaking. The questions in this case are whether there is a common law rule that should be read to provide background.
 One reason for it -- I just -- you don't seem to know completely about Canadian law. How much do you know about the tax law of Vietnam? Because Los Angeles is filled with Vietnamese refugees, many communities of such people in the United States. Do we know how many of them perhaps might owe taxes under the law of Vietnam, and maybe are talking to each other about whether they really want to pay it?
 I don't think this is a realistic problem, Justice Breyer, that should require the Court not to read a statute whose language --
 Well, what about the wealth tax in France?
 There are a variety of taxing schemes all across the world. The question that the United States has to make when it determines whether to prosecute a wire fraud scheme is whether it's in interest -- in the interest --
 Mr. Dreeben, at the beginning of your argument, you said there were four federal interests you were going to identify. You've been able to identify one. You don't want them running around with guns. What are the other three?
 The other three are --
 The second one, which I began to allude to before hearing some questions about -- foreign government.
 Before you were asked a brief question.
 -- are that people who engage in schemes in this country are capable of then using the same techniques against victims in this country. The third reason is that the creation of international schemes to defraud, like the smuggling scheme in this case, poses independent threats to the United States Government because international criminal organizations are particularly difficult for the United States to deal with. And the fourth reason is that it is an offense to a foreign government, the United States Executive Branch may conclude, to allow our soil and our wires to be used to perpetrate a smuggling scheme against a foreign government with the United States doing nothing about it.
 Well, if we're concerned about offending the foreign country, then isn't the way to go, in fact, the way Congress has gone in this area, we negotiate treaties? I mean, one of the reasons why we go the treaty route are the kind of problems that Justice Breyer brought up, we want to have reciprocal treaties. We want two things. We want to make sure that it's a basically fair system that we're dealing with. On the other hand, we want to say, "If we do anything with respect to your taxes, we want to make sure that we get the same benefit from you with respect to ours." So never mind the revenue rule, isn't it pervasive that -- when it comes to enforcing tax claims, that the route that Congress has chosen to go, and the Executive, as well, has been the treaty route?
 Justice Ginsburg, those are tax treaties designed to mutually assist the countries to collect taxes. This is a prosecution directed at fraud. The collection of taxes in a cooperative, reciprocal manner between governments implicates very different interests than the United States has when it seeks to combat people who have intended to devise, or have devised, a scheme to defraud in the --
 One of --
 -- United States.
 -- one of -- one of the last interests that you mentioned, about offending foreign governments, well, on the face of this, it would seem, the one that -- the country that's been done out of taxes is Canada, not the United States. So, we should help Canada, if it's interested in collecting revenue from these people or trying them for a criminal offense, to do that. It -- I asked Ms. Brill, Have they been indicted in Canada? She said yes, but she said it's -- they had not -- there has not been a request for extradition. Is that -- is that --
 That's my understanding, as well, Justice Ginsburg. And the pursuit of this prosecution by the United States reflects that when United States citizens engage in fraudulent conduct on our soil, our Government has a distinct interest, from Canada's interest, in pursuing the prosecution of this case.
 How long has this statute been on the books, this wire fraud statute? Pretty old statute.
 1952. And its antecedents are the mail fraud statute, which was enacted in 1872.
 How many prosecutions like this have there been? When was the first one?
 This --
 For, you know, using the mails or interstate commerce to defraud a foreign government of taxes?
 This type of prosecution became more common in the 1980s when Canada greatly increased its taxes on importation of tobacco and alcohol.
 More common, or didn't exist at all before the 19- -- do you know of any case before --
 No, I'm not aware of any case before --
 -- before the 1980s?
 That's right.
 Doesn't that suggest to you that the statute isn't naturally read to cover stuff like that?
 No, I think the statute --
 We didn't have smugglers before then?
 No, of course there were smugglers before then, but the statute, on its face, is broad. And the only justification -- the only two justifications for seeking to read it narrowly are, first, that there's a common law revenue rule that forms a backdrop for the construction of the statute. That is wrong, the Government submits, because there is no common law revenue rule that has ever been articulated that says one country cannot prosecute people in that country for defrauding a foreign government of tax --
 What's the second reason?
 The second reason is the claim that to deprive a foreign government of money by not paying tax revenues is not common law fraud.
 Okay. Well, and you have arguments against both of those two. Which arguments are at least -- at least -- arguable? What about a third rule, the rule of lenity?
 Well, Justice Scalia --
 If we -- if we are unsure, if it's a close question whether it's property, if it's a close question whether we're enforcing the tax laws of Canada by prosecuting somebody for violating the tax laws of Canada, if that's a closed question, why doesn't the rule of lenity apply?
 Well, if the Court concluded that the question was not susceptible of resolution by resort to the usual tools of statutory construction, then you would apply the rule of lenity. But it's our submission that neither of these two theories --
 But may I ask this question? I think you have conceded, in a footnote -- and maybe you're -- almost conceded -- that if this were a RICO case, a civil RICO case, that the Congress enacted the RICO statute against this background rule and that perhaps the RICO case could not go forward. What if it were a federal RICO case and -- the same facts -- would the RICO statute be qualified by the revenue rule?
 No, it would not, Justice Stevens, and that's because of the precise distinction that I drew in response to Justice Scalia's question. This is a suit by the United States Government, as Plaintiff, not by a foreign government, as Plaintiff or prosecutor. The revenue rule essentially concerned with interests of sovereignty. One foreign government should not be able to come into our courts and enforce its sovereign power by using our courts to collect taxes from our citizens.
 What about the other reasons underlying it, which is what I was trying to get at before? I see, literally, that the common law -- you know, the enforcement rule, this is not literally enforcement. But what I was driving at with my questions is, even though literally it's not, the problems of complexity, the problems of knowability, and the problems of there being so many, many foreign tax laws that we might think are basically unfair, that those considerations apply here, just as they do with the enforcement rule, and then add the fact that turning people into criminals under threat of prosecution by the Federal Government is really very much equivalent to enforcing the foreign rule in a court. I mean, that's the whole thing spelled out. And I meant it seriously, though I used foreign examples to, sort of, drive the point home. What is your response to that?
 Well, Justice Breyer, first of all, the complexity of foreign tax law is something that would defeat a federal prosecution in which we need to show specific intent to defraud if the law were not sufficiently clear for us to be able to meet that burden. This case illustrates the kind of prosecution that will be brought. There are taxes that are due upon the importation of alcohol. The Petitioners arranged, through the wires, to bring alcohol from Maryland up to New York, and then they got it across the border by not answering questions when asked by customs officials and by not going to secondary inspection when they were asked. In order to bring a criminal prosecution that requires specific intent to defraud, the government is not going to be relying on obscure systems. As to the concern about the enforcement of tax systems that the United States may believe are -- is unfair, that is the prerogative of the Executive Branch to determine in deciding whether a prosecution should be brought in a particular case. This Court has repeatedly recognized that the Executive Branch is the preeminent branch in the area of foreign affairs --
 To go to one more aspect of the statute which I don't think you've addressed, Congress said that -- with respect to the wire fraud and mail fraud and, I think, other things -- that restitution to the victim is mandatory, that it's not left up to the government to decide restitution or not. Except here restitution sounds very much like enforcing Canada's taxes, so you have conceded no restitution. But it seems to me that Congress thought of the wire/mail fraud statutes as cases in which there would be restitution, and that suggests that they didn't envision foreign taxes to be the object of the scheme to defraud.
 Justice Ginsburg, the syllogism doesn't track, because the entire scope of the revenue rule, as defined in the common law cases that can be pointed to as the background principle, has to do with a foreign government, or someone acting on its behalf, coming into this country's courts to enforce its tax rules. Here what you have is the United States Government determining that it is in the interest of the United States to bring a criminal prosecution. Now, in this case, the prosecutor did concede below that restitution was not appropriately ordered. That's not the position of the United States. The position of the United States is that restitution under the mandatory statute should be ordered and it does not infringe the revenue rule. But there are --
 Now, how could that be, because restitution is to the victim? The victim is Canada. You collect Congress -- or Canada's tax, and you give it to Canada. Is there any other kind of restitution?
 No, there isn't, Justice Ginsburg, but the revenue rule isn't of such a broad scope that it applies to efforts by the United States Government to secure punishment by -- for a criminal conviction. But, Justice Ginsburg, if the Court were to disagree with that and were to believe that restitution, even when it's been sought by the United States -- not by a foreign government, in its own right, with the power to instigate a lawsuit -- but that even when the United States does it, that somehow falls within the parameters of the common law revenue rule, then the answer to that problem would be to interpret the restitution statute against the background of the revenue rule, not to interpret the wire fraud statute against the background of the revenue rule and hold that a prosecution by the United States is wholly barred. The Petitioner's submission here is really rather extraordinary --
 The restitution statute is not ambiguous at all; whereas, this statute has a number of ambiguities in it. And if I had to find my way out of the restitution problem, I would pick the ambiguous statute to get out, rather than simply saying, "Well, though this restitution statute says this categorically, we will ignore it, because if we didn't ignore it, we would be enforcing the revenue laws of another country." There's nothing against enforcing the revenue laws of another country, if we want to; this is just a question of statutory interpretation. Should this ambiguous statute be interpreted that way? If Congress said, "We're going to enforce Canada's tax laws," there's nothing wrong with that. But --
 Justice Scalia --
 So you have two statutes. One of them seems to be quite ambiguous. The other one is categorical, you get restitution in all cases. Now, how do I wiggle out of it?
 There's a difference --
 Obviously, I wiggle out of it with the ambiguous statute.
 -- there's a difference, Justice Scalia, between an ambiguous statute and a broad statute. The wire fraud statute is unequivocally broad, and it has been so interpreted. It's not ambiguous on the question of whether it applies to schemes to defraud that may involve foreign victims; it says "any scheme to defraud." And I think, as Justice Kennedy's questions pointed out earlier, if there were a scheme to defraud a foreign business interest in Canada or a foreign governmental interest in Canada relating to some commercial venture, the wire fraud statute would apply, and --
 What about -- what about a scheme --
 But you haven't told me -- you haven't told me how you get out of the restitution statute. There's no ambiguity there, and it is not a rule of law that you can't -- it's unconstitutional to enforce the tax laws of Canada. Since it's entirely feasible, and since the text is categorical, how do you get out of the restitution statute?
 Here is how I get out of it, Justice Scalia. If you think, as I do not, that the revenue rule would bar restitution at the behest of the United States in a criminal prosecution, there is a background principle that says when there is an established rule of the common law, Congress legislates against that background, and unless it makes its intent clear and unequivocal to overcome that background rule of the common law, then the statute will not be interpreted to be in derogation of it. It was that principle that formed the basis for the government's view that Canada cannot come in under the RICO statute --
 Well, that view is in -- somewhat in tension with your view that the common law revenue rule doesn't stand in the way of this prosecution. If you have to interpret the statute in light of the general rule that one country doesn't mess with another country's taxes, absent a treaty.
 Well, Justice Ginsburg, there is no common law rule that one country doesn't mess with another country's taxes. What there are, are a set of cases that deal with specific problems in which foreign taxes were at issue. And in all of the 20th century versions of this problem, what you had is a foreign government or an entity, acting at the behest of a foreign government, coming into another country seeking to use that country's courts to enforce its own tax rules. And in that context, the justifications for saying that one country will not enforce another country's revenue laws have to do with the sovereignty interests of the host country. One country, when it seeks to obtain revenue to carry out its own governmental policies, is doing something fundamental to its sovereign existence, and there's no obligation of the United States to assist the foreign government in using its court system to achieve those independent sovereign aims, no prohibition on it, either. As Justice Scalia pointed out, it's not unconstitutional, if Congress wanted to allow it. But countries, historically, have not. And that principle does form an important backdrop --
 Have countries also -- just -- here, I don't know, in respect to the principle -- would it have been viewed as contrary to the principle if a country were to pass a law -- say, England were to pass a law saying it is a crime in England not to pay French taxes? I'm not saying they couldn't do it; I'm just saying, would a law like that, saying it is a crime in England not to pay French taxes -- would it have been viewed as contrary to an abrogation of -- or a -- you know, whatever you call it -- a derogation from the common law revenue rule?
 I think that that's essentially the same question in this case, with the one significant difference that here there is a domestic --
 But do you see why I want to characterize it? I mean, would you characterize -- my criminal statute's absolutely clear -- the clear is, it is a crime in England not to pay French taxes. Now, would you, or would scholars, or whoever, knew about the common law revenue rule, would they have said, "There is a derogation from the common law revenue rule," or would they have said, "It has nothing to do with it"?
 Well, I don't know what scholars would have said about it --
 No, what would you have said?
 This is what I would say about it.
 Yeah.
 When you're dealing with the principle that a statute of the United States will not be construed to be in derogation of a common law unless it's clear that that's its purpose, the Court should be very careful in defining what the parameters of the common law are. The Court should not take a common law rule and treat it as some dynamic entity that has capability of growing a dimension that is not consistent with its purposes and that it had never assumed in any decided case as a means of telling Congress, "You can't do what you have done." So I would say, Justice Breyer --
 We haven't told -- no, no, no, no, no, no, we're not telling Congress, "You can't do what you have done." We're saying, "Congress hasn't done this."
 Well, the only reason you would say that Congress hasn't done it, Justice Scalia, is if you concluded that -- and I would ask Petitioners what their best citations are, because I have not been able to find them -- what cases indicate that a country cannot bring the kind of prosecution that the United States did here to vindicate its own independent sovereign --
 Nobody says they can't do it. That's why I asked you my question. My question is simply whether you would consider an absolutely clear law -- we will -- we -- it is a crime not to pay your French taxes. I'm asking whether you would consider that -- I'm not saying they can't do it; I just want to know -- would it be in derogation of the common law principle?
 It would probably be in derogation of a more --
 That's what --
 -- fundamental principle.
 Not the revenue rule --
 Not the --
 -- but a more fundamental principle that one country usually does not legislate with respect to extraterritorial acts.
 That would be another one, too.
 But if you --
 Suppose they -- I -- that's why I want to know --
 But that's not applicable here, either, Justice Breyer, because the crime involves wire fraud in the United States.
 Yeah, but why isn't it applicable to the extent that there seems to be a mandatory obligation to order restitution? And it seems to me that the restitution that would be ordered would be just as much in derogation of the common law principle as the out-and-out collection in Justice Breyer's example.
 Justice Souter, again, to say that it's in derogation of the common law principle assumes that the common law principle has applicability to one country seeking to vindicate interests of its --
 Well, but I -- a moment ago, you said, "Okay, we'll assume that there would be some derogation," in Justice Breyer's example. I don't see why you don't come to the same conclusion with respect to the restitution aspect here.
 Because the derogation that I was talking about with respect to Justice Breyer is punishing conduct that occurs entirely extraterritorially. This is not conduct that occurs entirely --
 Yeah, but the revenue -- the revenue rule does not rest simply on the rationale of non-extraterritorial enforcement. It has -- it has other rationales: difficulty of understanding what the revenue rule is; the -- you know, the problems of policy; there are lots of revenue rules in foreign countries that we certainly wouldn't want to enforce, and so on. It's not just extraterritoriality. And those -- those policies would be just as much implicated by the -- by the restitution as by the out-and-out enforcement in Justice Breyer's example.
 Well, Justice Souter, I think that the policies underlying the revenue rule are narrower than the ones that you have articulated; but, even more to the point, they are not justifications that found their way into any holdings that would lead a reasonable legislator in 1952, when the wire fraud statute was enacted, to conclude that this is a rule that I'm going to have to specifically --
 Well, perhaps --
 Well -- I'm sorry.
 No, go on.
 No, you.
 I was going to say, perhaps there were no specific holdings, because it would have been regarded as, kind of, a bizarre derogation of the rule in the first place. Nobody had dreamed up this scheme earlier.
 I was about to say the same -- the same thing. You keep saying there are no cases that do this. Are there -- are there -- are there cases, before 1980, which do what you want to do -- that is, to use our fraud law, or something, to effectively enforce Canada's -- or some foreign country's tax law?
 No, but what I would say about --
 No.
 -- the revenue rule is that it is a shrinking principle of the common law, not one that has been growing. It originally started out as a principle that allowed countries to avoid invalidating contracts that they believed were in furtherance of commerce. It gradually came under attack, because what it said is that the United States will not notice that a foreign country's laws have been violated in the formation of a contract, and so the contract will be enforced. Commentators recognized that that was contrary to principles of comity and recognition that each country does have a reciprocal interest in acknowledging each other's laws. In the 20th century, those contract cases completely drop out of the picture, and what becomes left are sovereignty cases where a country is seeking to exert its sovereign power inside the United States or inside a foreign country -- the United States, itself, tried it once in Canada -- to collect taxes. And countries said, "We're not going to do that. We're going to leave it to the treaty process." But the rationales that Justice Breyer and Justice Souter have articulated, about complexity of foreign law and odious foreign tax systems, have never been the driving force behind the revenue rule. It's been --
 I got your point. I think it is that -- in my answer to my clear example, you would say no, that's not in derogation for the reason that there's an independent local reason for doing it. It's not being done to -- whether it has that effect or not, it's not being done in order to collect the foreign tax.
 That's right.
 That's been your response throughout.
 That is correct.
 Okay, I --
 What you have instead is a law of the United States that's enacted to serve perfectly valid interests that the United States Government has in rooting out fraud in this country and in dealing with schemes to defraud that are created here. And for the Court to say that, "We don't like these kinds of prosecutions, because we're concerned about really bad foreign tax systems, and we're concerned about complicated law, and we're concerned that some common law rule that had never actually assumed the scope that Petitioners ascribed to it, should be formed -- read as the background principle for the interpretation of this statute" is not a principle that finds any support in the construction of federal --
 Mr. Dreeben, can I ask you -- this is such a curious case. You were very candid in telling us that when Canada put these astronomical taxes on tobacco and alcohol, that was almost an invitation to smugglers. Did we have any discussions with Canada -- I mean, they do have that border, which is rather easy to cross -- about what we were going to do when they put the taxes on liquor sky-high?
 I am not aware, Justice Ginsburg, of what specific law enforcement conversations occurred, but I can tell you that there is extensive law enforcement cooperation with Canada, as a close neighbor, and that the interests of the United States very much do favor our policing against smuggling here, and Canada policing against smuggling there. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Dreeben. Ms. Brill, you have four-and-a-half minutes left.
 Thank you. The common law cases universally say that it does not matter who is bringing the claim. It can be the foreign government or it can be another person.
 Can I just ask you to tell us what your strongest case is? Because they did raise that question.
 Sure. On the -- on the issue of the identity of the person bringing the claim, the contract cases, Holman and Boucher, stand for that proposition, and the Peter Buchanan case, which came down in 1950, just before the wire fraud statute was enacted -- this was in the Appellate Court in Ireland -- it says, "It is not a question whether the plaintiff is a foreign state or the representative of a foreign state or its revenue authority. In every case, the substance of a claim must be scrutinized. And if it then appears that it is really a suit brought for the purpose of collecting the debts of a foreign revenue, it must be rejected." That's at 1955 A.C. 529. And so with the -- with the Mandatory Restitution Act, this clearly is something to collect the debts of a foreign nation. And the sentencing scheme that Justice Ginsburg alluded to earlier, in which the sentences were enhanced based on the intended loss, demonstrate that this is an enforcement action. Stringam versus Dubois, which is an Alberta case from 1992, involving -- the plaintiff there was an executor of a probate estate, and the court said, "The identity of the plaintiff in the action is not vital if the action indirectly has the effect of enforcing revenue laws of a foreign country." That's at 135 A.C. at page 70. And the way the revenue rule has been cited repeatedly is that it -- what it prevents is not just direct enforcement, but direct or indirect enforcement. And so it is -- the fact that there have not been criminal prosecutions, it clearly would have been in derogation of the common law for a -- for England to pass a statute saying it is criminal in England to break the laws of France.
 See, he's saying it isn't, for the reason that, he says, that if England did it for independent reasons, it wasn't doing it because it wanted to help France get it's money, that then it wouldn't have been in derogation. Of course, it would have been legal, either way, but he says it wouldn't have been in derogation, for that reason.
 Right. Well, it clearly would have. There was no common law practice -- we have -- we have not found, in all the research -- and the Government has not found -- any example of a criminal prosecution -- not just in this country; anywhere in the world -- to -- deriving from the violation of a foreign government's tax. And so --
 You're saying, in effect, that derogation is an effects test, not an intent test.
 Yes, Your Honor. Yes, Justice Souter. And the -- in terms of what the government's interests are, there were no deceptive acts in this country. The way the Government gets a material misstatement is by a failure to disclose at the Canadian border, which only -- even though they did not put in evidence of what the -- that Canada even had a law requiring disclosure, the only way there could have been any kind of material misstatement would be if Canadian law required it, not if -- not anything that happened in the United States. In Cleveland, the Court was very clear to point out -- one of the reasons to adopt a rule of lenity in interpreting the mail fraud statute and the wire fraud statute is because violations serve as a predicate for RICO actions and for money-laundering violations. And so what the government's position is, is that we should carve out this ad-hoc exception and allow wire fraud prosecution, even though we would not allow any kind of a civil RICO action and even though we're going to have an ad-hoc exception for the Mandatory Victims Restitution Act. But what the Court said in Cleveland is, the way we should do this is by adopting a proper interpretation in the first place, not by -- of the wire fraud statute -- not by having ad-hoc exceptions. And the reference to prosecutorial discretion that there should be faith that the Government will only prosecute, I guess, what the Government regards as exceptional cases is not something that can provide any business involved in an international transaction with any -- with any comfort. And thank you very much.
 Thank you. The case is submitted.
 Mr. Boas, the Court will hear argument in Small against the United States.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case presents the issue of whether, when deciding the meaning of a statute, we will focus, as the Government suggests, on two words only, any court, or whether we will look at the statute as a whole, whether we will consider the statute as a symmetrical and coherent regulatory scheme and decide the meaning of the statute by appreciating how sections relate to one another. In this particular case, 922(g)(1) of 18 U.S. Code is a -- represents a merger of two old sections, title IV and title VII, that were passed in 1968 in the Omnibus Crime Control Act. In -- in those -- in that statute, we had two redundant and overlapping sections, and one talked about prohibiting persons who have been convicted in any court of a crime punishable by more than a year. One, title VII, talked about prohibiting persons convicted in any court of the United States or a State of a felony. There were different penalties, slightly different classes of people. Title IV focused more on the receiver; title VII more on the possessor. But nothing -- nothing about the -- these two titles, about the legislative history suggests that Congress at any time meant something different from the term, any court, in title IV and any court of the United States in title VII. And when these two were merged in 1986 in the Firearms Owners' Protection Act, again, nothing suggests, nothing in the comments, nothing in the statute, that these two terms -- that the elimination of the language, any court of the United States, was --
 Well, I guess we have held, though, several times that Congress meant to define very broadly when it enacted felon in possession of firearm statutes. Did we not?
 That's -- that's correct, Justice O'Connor. However --
 So it makes it a tougher case when you use the word any because we've given the -- the word any generally a broad definition.
 Well, earlier this year in the Nixon case, this Court said that when we look at any -- and that was a case dealing with the meaning of any entity. Did it mean any entity, public or private, or any private entity? The Court said any can and does mean different things depending upon the setting, and the Court said when using it broadly would lead to strange and indeterminate results, we'll give it a more narrow reading, which the Court did. Now, you're right, Justice O'Connor. This Court has said that the purpose of the felon in possession statute was to be broad and sweeping, but the Government reiterates that view, citing repeatedly three cases, Scarborough, Bass, and Lewis, and all three of those cases in which the Court referred to Congress' comments and this Court's own comments about the broad sweep of the statute were 1202(a) cases. And so notwithstanding the fact that the Court said this is a broad statute, each one of those cases, Lewis, Bass, and Scarborough, were cases where by definition the prohibition was against persons convicted in any court of the United States or a State. So that language doesn't help the Government at all because those were 1202(a) cases which limited specifically the Court to any court of the United States. So to take the -- and I -- and -- the simplistic view that as the -- as the Fourth and Sixth Circuit did and as the Government does here, that any means any, without regard to the rest of the statute, is simply -- is -- is too narrow a focus. Let's look at the statute. It's true that the word -- the term, the two words, any court, is not defined. But if we look in the definitions section, the term, crime punishable by more than a year, is defined. And so what we should really be focusing on is the phrase, convicted in any court of a crime punishable by more than a year. And that definition says the term, crime punishable by more than a year, excludes any State or Federal antitrust or business regulatory offense. Now, if we exclude from the definition of crime punishable by more than a year and the Government's -- if we exclude from that any State or Federal antitrust law and the Government's interpretation is adopted, then we're left with the anomalous result that if a person is convicted of an antitrust offense in this country, they're allowed to possess a firearm. If they're convicted of one in France or England, they can't.
 Are there any such cases? I mean, I never heard actually --
 No.
 -- when people -- no. I mean, are there any cases in which France or England has convicted people of an antitrust violation punishable by imprisonment for more than a year? I -- I didn't know that their antitrust laws had a criminal aspect, though I haven't looked it up.
 Nor have I --
 Fine. Well, I -- I've never heard if anyone in any foreign country, other than ours, though I gather my law clerk found that in Japan, in fact, Japan does have a criminal antitrust law. They may be the only ones outside the United States, and I don't know that anyone has ever been convicted under it because they're not too -- or they didn't used to be too fierce on antitrust enforcement.
 Well, 921(20) or --
 I'm just wondering how anomalous or your anomaly is. (Laughter.)
 Well, the -- the limitation not only excludes antitrust offenses, it excludes any business regulatory offense.
 And are there such?
 Of course. I think --
 I mean, maybe.
 Yes.
 I don't -- I don't -- but I just -- are we sure that there -- that, you know, that this anomaly exists?
 I'm certain that there are business regulatory crimes throughout the world.
 Why did they say any State or Federal? I mean, in -- in a way this provision -- you -- you may say that the -- that the substantive effect of the provision supports your interpretation, but the text of the provision supports the Government's --
 Well --
 -- because if any only means State or Federal, there was no need to say State or Federal in this provision. You could have simply said any in this provision, just as you said it elsewhere. So one would think that they said State or Federal because they wanted to exclude foreign antitrust matters.
 Well, this same limitation, Justice Scalia, existed as a limitation under 1202(a) where any court said any State or Federal court and the exclusion said any State or Federal court. It's consistent --
 Well, I don't care how it got there. I'm just saying there -- there -- if -- if any means what you said it means, namely State or Federal, there would have been no need to limit this other provision to State or Federal because the whole statute would only cover State or Federal.
 Well, but at some point in the statute, Congress has to give an indication of their intent, and this is where it is. For example, there's another limitation immediately following it which says it shall also not include any State offense which is described as a misdemeanor in the State and carries no more than 2 years.
 No. Well, but -- but Justice Scalia's point -- and I -- I think he's correct -- is that this cuts at least as much in favor of the Government as you and probably more because you would make Federal and State unnecessary surplus.
 Well, there has to be some indication --
 You don't -- you don't set forth the main qualification to the main definition in a -- in a later subsection.
 Well, if we go further with 921(20), there's another limitation that again clearly deals with States, and that's the restoration of civil rights provision. The Government concedes in their brief -- and that was an effort to essentially statutorily reverse the Dickerson v. Banner Institute case -- that that applies to State situations. The idea that if a person receives a State pardon or his record is expunged, that wouldn't be a disqualifying factor. And they talk about the law of the foreign state being what determines whether it's a conviction or not. Now, clearly we're not looking at going to some pardon process in Germany or Uruguay to decide whether a person still has a conviction. Another part of the statute that's very clear, 924(e)(1). That's the armed career criminal section. That section says that if a person's who's convicted under 922(g)(1), our statute, and has three prior serious drug convictions in a court described in 922(g)(1), then they get 15 years. Now, that definition of serious drug conviction is a State or Federal conviction. Now, let's flip over to 21 U.S.C. 802(44), the drug statute where you have a similar recidivist type of statute where you go from a 5-year mandatory to a 10-year mandatory if you have a prior drug conviction. There in 802(44), a serious drug offense is defined as a State, Federal, or foreign drug offense. So we see that Congress can differentiate when it wants to. Now, they're --
 Would -- would you concede that -- that this is at least sloppy drafting? Because they said any in one place, they said State or Federal in other places. Shouldn't they be -- be consistent in their terminology?
 Well, perhaps they should be more consistent, Justice Ginsburg, but the overall -- I mean, if you go down the list of the prohibitions in 922(g)(1), you can see that the thrust of this is -- is to deal with domestic situations. There's one that says you can't own a firearm if you're a -- a fugitive from law -- a fugitive from justice. That's specifically defined as a fugitive from another State within the United States.
 Mr. Boas, I think you make a strong argument that Congress probably didn't think of this particular problem. Do you suppose if at the hearings before the committee, the process of the legislation, some witness came in and said, do you realize this language is so broad it will cover the person who is convicted of a felony in Japan, as well as person who's convicted of a felony in Illinois, do you think they would have modified the statute?
 I think they would have. I think that -- I don't concede that there was really a need to, but I think they would have because they would have said it's --
 Well, there would have been a need to under your view now.
 That's right. But they would have historically going back to '68 and before, we always intended this to just cover domestic situations.
 But I suppose somebody on the committee might have said, well, we don't want this kind of person to have a gun, and the fact he's convicted in Japan rather than in Brooklyn really doesn't make any difference with regard to the purpose of the statute.
 If the individual is convicted in Japan, Justice Stevens, then he would not be under our immigration laws allowed to come to this country, and if he did come --
 Well, but this person --
 -- he'd be an illegal alien.
 But the defendant in this case was convicted in Japan and he somehow got to the United States.
 Well, because he's an American citizen.
 Well --
 So -- but Congress can't cure every problem that exists in the world, and this statute is fairly comprehensive.
 Are people really not allowed to come in if they've been convicted of any crime?
 Any crime that carries more than a year basically. It's pretty --
 Suppose it was a crime like not wearing a veil if you're a woman in a country that -- suppose it was a crime like criticizing the government if you were in Soviet Russia. Suppose it was a crime like -- you know, there are all kinds of crimes that we -- we would never consider crimes --
 Well, that's --
 -- and in other countries there are -- we don't let anyone in if they've done any of those things?
 No. Well, those people will probably be seeking political asylum. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn -- under the Government's interpretation, Nobel Prize winners would be precluded from -- Solzhenitsyn did 8 years in a Soviet prison because he said nasty things about Joseph Stalin. Two American women in Afghanistan, before the fall of the Taliban regime, were arrested and convicted because they possessed Bibles. Now, the Government says, well, these are anomalies. These don't occur often. But Congress had to be aware of the possibility of tinhorn dictatorships all over the world having court systems that were so devoid of due process that we have to take a look at whether we want to --
 Well, the -- the court of appeals here said what it would -- it read in a check. It said it wouldn't read it to really mean any conviction. It had to be in a system that was fundamentally fair. Wasn't that what the court of appeals said?
 That's what they said, but -- but when and how do we decide that? There's another offense under 922(g) -- or under 922 that makes it a crime to give a false answer on a -- a firearms questionnaire when you go to buy the gun -- buy the gun. Now, what does the individual do? Does he say to the firearms dealer, do you have a list of countries where our Government has decided it's a fair enough system that I can say no -- yes, I have a conviction in view of the list that it's an unfair system so I can say yes, I have no -- or no, I have no convictions? I mean, it -- one of the reasons where we employ, for example, the rule of lenity, is -- is a person put on notice of what it is that's criminal and what is not. When does it come up that the system isn't fair enough to count?
 Well, I think -- let -- let's put, you know, the worst for you. If it were put to Congress, which would you prefer, that -- that Solzhenitsyn not be able to have a gun or that the worst kind of violent criminal convicted and imprisoned and escaped from a foreign country who manages to get into this country can go in and buy a gun? Which -- which of these two would you prefer? And I think I'd say, well, you know, it's tough on Solzhenitsyn he can't own a gun, but he'll probably get over it. (Laughter.)
 Well, what I'd prefer and what the statute means aren't necessarily the same thing, Your Honor. I'd prefer violent criminals who are dangerous not to have guns. But again, that --
 Suppose you put the question to Congress, which would you prefer? Would you prefer the occasional person who's been convicted of a foreign court, comes over here, that this statute doesn't apply to him, or would you prefer that all the refugees from Eastern Europe and people who come from Arab countries and people who come from countries that have quite different systems in places all over the world discover that suddenly they're felons because of things they never would have dreamt of because they were perhaps convicted of selling gasoline on the open market or perhaps they were convicted of any of these religious crimes we've talked about, selling a Bible? Suppose you put that question to Congress.
 I think Congress would say the perils and problems that exist by a blanket inclusion without any method of determining which count and which don't count of foreign convictions are too great. Now --
 Well, if it's a -- if it's a matter of notice and -- then that's a separate issue. Plus the Government, it seems to me, should put on its form that this includes foreign conviction, and that solves that problem.
 Well, but what if it's a foreign conviction where there's no due process? Is there a checklist that in that foreign conviction, did you have a jury, did you have the right to confront your accuser, did you have the right to remain silent? I mean, we all seem to realize that the Government's position that any conviction anywhere is too stark a place. And again --
 May -- may we go back to the -- the choice that you were given by Justice Scalia first and then Justice Breyer? I thought that someone who comes in here illegally and possesses a gun commits an offense.
 That's right.
 So -- so there's not -- Congress would say to that hypothetical, we've got a third choice, much more sensible. Anybody who sneaks in here without permission and has a gun --
 That's correct.
 -- commits a crime.
 That's one of the subsections of 922(g)(5). Anybody who's an illegal alien here illegally can't have a gun. Anyone --
 That doesn't cover Americans, of course --
 No. It doesn't cover --
 -- who go -- go and commit crimes abroad, are convicted abroad, and -- and come back to home sweet home and then get a gun. I mean, that seems to me extraordinary.
 That -- I didn't hear your --
 That seems to me extraordinary. I don't think Congress would have wanted that.
 Well, I don't think Congress can be said to have intended or envisioned that they would cure every problem in the world. It's a very, very narrow category of American citizens convicted abroad who come back here.
 I think if there was a problem that -- that they were going to leave unsolved, it is less likely the problem of having an American citizen killed by a gun toted by somebody who has been convicted of a crime abroad than it is the problem of somebody having been convicted abroad of some silly crime like wearing a veil or not wearing a veil or something else. If -- if it's either of those two problems that they meant to leave overlooked, I would say it's the latter. They might well have said, well, the courts will take care of that.
 Well, Your Honor, it's unclear what -- what their thought process was in this matter. But I can say this, that the narrow category that escapes the coverage of this statute -- there's nothing to indicate anywhere in any of the debates, in the language of the statute that that's what Congress intended. And again, if you look at the overall view here, I mean, fugitive from justice. It's limited to someone from the State. Person -- let's look at 922(g)(9). Very clear, incapable of misunderstanding. The same prefatory language. A person convicted in any court -- exactly the same, and it ends with the same language -- cannot ship, possess, receive. And what does it say? Instead of saying convicted of a crime punishable by more than a year, it says convicted of a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence. And that's defined as a State or Federal misdemeanor.
 Where -- where is that defined?
 That's defined in 921(a)(33), Your Honor. It's specifically limited. Now, here we are. A person who beats his wife in England can have a gun in this country, but a person who commits a business regulatory offense in Germany can't. It makes no sense. The -- it -- it's a very clear statement by Congress that a misdemeanor crime of domestic violence -- they're only intending it to be a State or Federal crime.
 Once again, that -- that cuts both ways. Why would they -- if the text reads the way you say it reads, why did they have to say is a misdemeanor under Federal or State law? Because it wouldn't have mattered. The only courts -- the only convictions that would be covered would be Federal or State convictions. They would not need that -- that qualification.
 At -- at some point a person has to be told what Congress was intending. This language goes back to '68 where the language in the exclusion limiting it to State -- excluding Federal and State convictions matched the language in the term, any court, in 1202(a), which was title VII. They were -- they were complementing each other. And -- and if you look at even as far back as the Batchelder decision in the '70's from this Court, the Court talked about these two being redundant, overlapping, the only difference being that one uses the term felony, one uses the term crime punishable by more than a year.
 Mr. Boas, when they combined these two --
 Yes.
 -- and ones -- the 1202 did say Federal or State -- they made other changes, harmonizations. In the explanation of their consolidation of the two sections, to what extent did they discuss changes and the reasons for them?
 The -- they made no discussion of the reason for taking out the language, of the United States or of any State, and what they -- the only language was that we're intending to merge these into one statute --
 But they did -- they did explain other things --
 Yes.
 -- other changes, but this one -- there's silence --
 Exactly.
 -- as far as I understand.
 And -- and by keeping in the exclusions, by -- by looking at 924(e)(1) where it -- what's very important to me is that 924(e)(1) says if you have three prior drug -- serious drug offenses in a court referred to in 922(g)(1), you get 15 years. Those three prior three drug offenses in a court referred to in 922(g)(1) are State or Federal drug offenses by definition. It seems to me that it really couldn't be any more clear. And frankly, to the extent it's not totally clear and it could go either way, I think then the rule of lenity requires that it be decided with a more narrow construction, that is, that any court meant any court of the State or of the United States. I believe it was in the -- in the '90's when this Court's opinion, authored by Justice Thomas in I think it was called Alvarez-Sanchez, dealt with a statute, 3105 dealing with the admissibility of confessions in Federal cases and that they won't be inadmissible if they're taken by any law enforcement official more than 6 hours after the arrest. And the issue what does any mean in terms of any law enforcement official. And the Court said it means any State or Federal law enforcement official. Now, it didn't have to reach the issue of whether it included foreign law enforcement officials, but certain things are obvious without an -- an explanation. And you're right. There was some sloppy drafting here and it could have been more clear, but when we look at the statute as a whole and try to harmonize the various parts of that statute, it would be almost absurd to think, when we look -- and -- and maybe these anomalies won't occur all the time, as you point out, Justice Breyer, but it would almost be absurd to think that with all of these limitations, exclusions, when we run down the list under 922(g)(1), that Congress was talking about any court in the world. Now --
 Let me -- let me ask you the question the -- the Chief Justice would ask, were he here, because he always asked this kind of a question. What -- if you had to pick your best case of ours which interpreted the word any in the way that you would like us to interpret here, what's -- what's the best case you have?
 I'd say -- that's -- there's a question --
 It's a good question. He asks good questions.
 It's a good question. (Laughter.)
 I'd say the Nixon case decided this year which said that any can and does mean different things depending upon the setting and whether it works strange and indeterminate results would be one of my best cases. There's -- when I sit down, I'll probably think of a better one, but --
 Maybe you can think --
 How -- how about --
 Maybe you can think of a unanimous case.
 Well -- (Laughter.)
 And this is one I'm -- I'm surprised that you didn't cite, but it -- I don't think you did -- EEOC against Arabian American Oil Company, where the wording of the statute was anyplace outside the United States, title VII coverage, and this Court held that anyplace outside the United States did not mean that a U.S. employer operating abroad had to abide by the anti-discrimination norms with respect to hiring in some place abroad because Congress was thinking in terms of the inter-State sitting -- setting and not international.
 Well, I -- I'm not familiar with that case.
 That -- that was a decision by the Chief. So -- (Laughter.)
 That's a good one -- that's a good one too, Judge -- Justice. I -- I -- there's -- there's another case that I'd refer to which is the -- the Gonzales case, which is cited by the Government. Gonzales is interesting because it deals with 924(c)(1), which is the section that says you get 5 consecutive years if you're convicted of -- 5 years consecutive to any other sentence if you're convicted of possessing a firearm during the course of a serious drug offense. And in that case, the Court concluded that any other sentence meant any State or Federal sentence, not just a Federal sentence. Now, the Government might argue that that helps them because the -- the defendant in that case wanted it to be limited to any Federal sentence because he was serving a State sentence, and the question was would the 5 years for the 924 violation be consecutive or concurrent, as the trial court gave it. But it -- what the Court did was say any depends on the context of the rest of the statute. And here, we think it means State and Federal. They didn't talk about foreign convictions. You know, it's interesting. It's ironic that -- that while we're debating how American citizens should be impacted by foreign convictions, the administration is unwilling to sign the treaty that would make American citizens subject to the International Criminal Court because there's concern about what would happen to Americans abroad, even in that court, not in a court in -- in Uruguay or in North Korea, but in the International Criminal Court. In fact, in the preliminary findings of the FOPA statute, the -- the Congress said -- and this Court doesn't have to decide and I'm not asking the Court to decide the Second Amendment issue, but Congress found the Second Amendment was a fundamental constitutional right. And the name of the statute is the Firearms Owners' Protection Act. Congress had in mind protecting the owners of firearms when necessary, and --
 You call that FOPA? That's the name of the statute? (Laughter.)
 It's an unfortunate acronym, isn't it? (Laughter.)
 That's right. The spelling is a little bit different, Justice Scalia. But Congress -- the -- the name of the statute tells you something about Congress' intent. The otherwise licit and blameless activity of possessing a firearm isn't the equivalent of selling drugs. Now, maybe if you have a prior drug offense and you're a drug dealer, under 802 of 21, Congress said you get your sentence doubled whether it's a State, Federal, or foreign conviction, but under 924(e) for a conviction under a court defined in 922(g)(1), the prior only ups your sentence if it's a State or Federal conviction. We can't ignore the overall statutory scheme here, which time and time again refers to domestic matters. The Government in their brief says foreign convictions are used all the time, and they give three examples. They say we recognize them for the purpose of extraditing American citizens. They say we recognize them because if you're convicted of a -- a sex offense in certain foreign countries, you have to register here. And they say we recognize them -- I forget what their third reason is. But there's no example that they gave or that they can give where a foreign conviction is ever used anywhere else in this country as an element of the crime. I mean, it's used for recidivist purposes and State courts have debated back and forth whether we're going to double somebody's sentence because of a foreign conviction, but it's never used anywhere else as an element of the crime. This -- this would be a first, and it's pretty significant. To me it's ironic that the Sentencing Commission said you can't use a foreign conviction simply to up somebody a few months in the guidelines. But the Government here argues that we can use it to satisfy an element of the crime --
 Recidivism is an element of the crime. If -- if you have a crime of, you know, repeated felony, recidivism is an element.
 Well, that -- that's correct, Your Honor. Of course, the -- it's an exception under Apprendi that the -- the prior crime. But what -- what I'm saying is it's -- it's a slightly different situation in terms of it being -- I know we have Blakely and the whole sentencing factor issue. But it -- it's a slightly different use of a prior and making -- in other -- in all those cases, the -- it's a crime whether or not you have a felony. The felony might make it a more serious crime. In our case, this isn't a crime without this felony. That's the thing that makes it a crime. And what I'm saying is the only situation we have where something that's otherwise blameless conduct becomes a crime is the use of a felony. There's no other situation where a foreign felony is employed or has been employed in that situation. If there's no other questions, I'd like to, if it would please the Court, reserve the --
 I'm sorry. You've exhausted your time.
 I have. Well, thank you.
 Ms. Millett.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Justice Scalia, you asked about what case we would want to adopt and be our strongest case on the meaning of the word any in the statute, and my answer to that question, although I take the liberty of answering it, though you didn't ask me --
 You can ask it as well -- (Laughter.)
 -- is the Gonzales case where this Court said that the word any in the gun control law, in this context, in this framework means, read naturally -- I'm quoting here. Read naturally, the word any has an expansive meaning, that is, one or some indiscriminately of whatever kind. This is not, Justice Ginsburg, a statute where Congress wrote sloppily. In fact, in Barrett and Huddleston, this Court specifically said and noted that excruciating care with which Congress wrote title IV, section --
 There is -- there's an overarching concern and I'll -- I'd like to put it to you right from the beginning. When a legislature legislates, be it the State or Federal Government, it is generally thinking in terms of its own domain, its own bailiwick. When Congress legislates, it's thinking about the United States. Sometimes it's thinking about abroad, but most of the time when it is, it says so. And we have a number of cases, not just the Arabian American Oil Company. I mean, that -- the language of title VII was between a State and anyplace outside thereof, anyplace outside thereof. And in that very case, the Chief made the point that I'm putting to you now, that Congress thinks about the United States, our country, and if it means to say something that will take in other places in the world, it says so clearly. And we don't make the assumption that Congress was intending to have any extraterritorial flip to its law unless it tells us that. That's my overall concern about the Government's position in this case.
 Justice Ginsburg, this is not an extraterritorial application of a statute. This regulates a threat to American public safety within the United States by someone within the United States based on their conduct, possession of a firearm by a dangerous person within the United States. That is not extraterritorial application of the law.
 Yes, but --
 That's no more --
 -- but let me just interrupt on your -- your best case suggestion. I don't think the test is when has the word any been used in different ways, but has the word any court ever been used by Congress to include foreign courts.
 The -- the phrase convicted in any court --
 No. I'm asking about just the words, any court. What's your best case for the proposition that that would normally be construed by Congress to include foreign courts?
 I don't -- I don't have a case that specifically talks about --
 You don't have a case.
 -- that yet, but if I can -- if I can explain why the phrase convicted in any court -- because any court -- the -- the problem is you're not -- there's not a case for that. The word, any court, that -- those two words appear in a lot of places in the United States Code.
 And do they ever refer to foreign courts? That's the question.
 The -- not -- not that I'm aware of, but -- but they don't -- it -- it doesn't address it one way or the other. Most of the times, the vast majority of the times that you see any court in the United States, it -- in the United States Code, it's followed by qualifying terms. What's very important here is that the phrase convicted in any court without qualification. There's lots of any courts in the United States --
 But the reason you often need qualification is there's -- there's sort of a basic question, does this include State courts as well as -- as well as Federal, and it's often necessary to spell it out one way or the other. But I don't -- I'm not aware of any precedent for trying to decide whether it also embraces foreign courts.
 Justice Stevens, if I could make two points. Again, convicted in any court is rarely employed by Congress. Rarely. And we've cited in our brief on the occasions it has been employed, the context and structure are wholly consistent with including foreign judgments. The PATRIOT Act created a ban on the possession of biological agents or toxins, and it -- it picked up this same phrase and put it in there, and I think it is -- would -- and that is also a statute that in a separate provision has extraterritorial application.
 How many times have you used this statute to go after people who were convicted in a foreign court?
 It -- it's -- I can't give you an exact number because we --
 About, approximate.
 -- we don't know about the ones that we never hear about.
 More like 100, more like 50, more like 10, more like 5? About how many?
 It's -- it's not that -- I would -- I would say there's probably 10 to a dozen, but I -- I have to --
 10 to a dozen over how long a period of time? 20 years, 18 years?
 Since 1968. It's been on the books since 1968.
 '68. Now -- so 35-40 years. Now -- now, how many times do you think that people -- I mean, the -- the -- if you've used it only a dozen times or so in about 40 years, then it doesn't sound like a major threat. What I'm weighing against that is the possibility that people are really convicted abroad of selling Bibles. That really does happen, and there really were economic crimes in 1968 in all the Eastern European countries, and these aren't fanciful examples I've been giving you. And so if you were in Congress -- or -- or why do you think that Congress would have wanted to get the courts into the mess of trying to decide why wouldn't those crimes be covered and were the procedures fair? And we start distinguishing one country from another. And what are the procedures in the Ukraine or Kazakhstan anyway? I mean, my goodness, what a mess for the sake of a dozen cases in 40 years.
 Justice Breyer -- and Justice Stevens, I do want to get back because I do have a lower court case that interprets any court in the way you discussed. I want to get back to that. But Justice Breyer, I understand this being a very important concern, and -- and there are no doubt particular applications that could seem unappealing, just as in Lewis v. United States where this Court held that an invalid, a patently unconstitutional State conviction counts for section 922(g)(1). The reason that the -- the convictions are covered here is Congress was not --
 Which was it? Just -- what was the case you just mentioned?
 Lewis v. United States, and that is -- that's really our favorite case, although we like the word of -- definition Gonzales has for any. But in Lewis v. United States, this Court addressed the question whether the ban on possession of firearms by someone convicted of, I'll say, a felony, a term of imprisonment of more than 1 year, applies to -- to convictions that are allegedly unconstitutional under State law or may, in fact, be unconstitutionally entered. They could have been the product of a coerced confession. The allegation there was lack of representation of counsel.
 Well, that -- that example, which you gave in your brief, gave me this concern. The problem that you've just been describing, the State convictions that may be invalid but is being used under 922, I regard that as a kind of a venue question because you can go back to the State that rendered the conviction and say, State, I was convicted in violation of the Constitution, give me my good habeas writ that I get -- can get from the State. Then I wipe out that conviction and I don't have it anymore. But the person who's been convicted, say, in whatever examples -- take -- Zimbabwe would be another example. Libya. To go back to that system and get a conviction expunged. That's why you can't use a case within the U.S. system where it's a question of where do you go to wipe out your prior conviction. And for someone abroad, there isn't that option.
 Justice Ginsburg, in Daniels v. United States, which dealt with 924, the sentencing enhancement provision, but it has a -- the parallel and incorporates 922(g)(1) convictions, this Court held -- a plurality of this Court held in divided opinions that -- in fact, that the -- the bar -- or that you still count an unconstitutional or allegedly unconstitutional State conviction, even if it was never appealed and that -- and there is no more opportunity for appeal. The time has passed. And under 922(g)(1), we also count.
 But that's -- that's a question of waiver or forfeiture. Those are the ordinary rules that apply.
 Yes, but that --
 But -- but there's a basic rule in civil as well as criminal procedure, that if you want to attack a judgment, you go where that judgment was rendered. And of course, you should abide by the timing rules of that, but that's just a very sensible thing within a federal union. If you're -- if you're attacking what State A does, go to State A, don't tell State C.
 And --
 But that -- that doesn't operate internationally.
 Well, it does certainly in this case. He could have appealed his conviction in Japan and he did not. So he had a forum to do that in. But --
 Yes, but you're not building that into your interpretation of the statute at all because you have said in your brief -- and correct me if I've got you wrong -- you don't like what the Third Circuit did. You say just the fact of the conviction counts. Don't investigate, court, whether it was a fair system that comports with fundamental notions of due process. Just see if there's a conviction anyplace in the world. And so what -- what you're telling me is that it doesn't matter that you didn't appeal because even if he were precluded from appealing for some reason that we would consider totally unfair, it doesn't matter on your view of this statute.
 That -- that's right, Justice Ginsburg, and that is -- you know, the -- the statute also bars receipt of firearms by anyone who's under indictment. And that application applies even though you can't appeal, except for exceptional circumstances. You can't appeal an indictment. And the 922(g)(1) bar, this Court's decision in Lewis made clear, is that it still applies unless and until your conviction is overturned. So you don't have to have had a -- a conviction vetted through the appellate process before the bar attaches. In -- in the immigration context --
 But that's -- that's standard for judgments anyway. When the judgment is final, it means you've gotten through the first -- it has preclusive effect. Almost always, when a judgment is overturned on appeal, then you go back to State 2 and say, look, it's been overturned on appeal, and at least in the civil side, almost always State 2 will say, okay, we'll give you post-judgment relief because what we were relying on as our sister State judgment is no longer on the books. I can't imagine that in our criminal system it doesn't work the same way.
 Well, certainly in immigration and extradition, you don't get to appeal the validity of your foreign conviction or the -- the processes that led to it. So this is not an alien concept. And it's very important to understand what Congress was doing here. This isn't --
 I'm asking if it's alien in our criminal justice system, not in deportation, not in -- extradition is somebody who did somebody -- something abroad, and we don't send people just to anyplace. Don't we have to have a treaty?
 Right. We have treaties with more than 100 countries and we don't -- and -- and the courts do not examine the fairness of the proceedings or --
 Because the person is going to be tried in that other system, and we have bound -- within our international system, we say we're part of a world community and we want Japan to extradite people who have done bad things here to the United States, and so similarly, we will extradite to Japan. We don't want them to look at our system and judge it. We're sending somebody to be tried there. So extradition is -- is something entirely different than --
 Although we -- we do also extradite, just to serve sentences, where there may have already been a trial that could be as flawed as anyone could conceive or articulate. So --
 Well, we have the check already that these are -- these are places with whom we want to do criminal justice business together. So --
 Well, what we have is the check that the political branches have decided that it's important to attach significance to foreign court --
 And then we have the -- we have the document where it's very clear we want to have extradition with the UK, with Japan. Here, you're relying on the word court, and you don't have it all spelled out like you do in an extradition treaty. And that's the problem here. Sure, if Congress had said we mean foreign court, then that would be it, but it hasn't said that and we have to determine does it mean the same thing as it means in the extradition context or the deportation context where you have a clear statement that Congress means a tribunal abroad.
 In fact, in 8 U.S.C. 1182(a) which -- which -- admissibility criterion for aliens, convictions of moral turpitude, there's no reference to whether it's a conviction by a foreign court or a domestic court.
 But if somebody is coming into the country, somebody is asking to come in, any conviction that you're talking about, of course, refers to someplace abroad.
 No. No, it doesn't, Justice Ginsburg, because frequently and throughout that same statute, it refers to convictions in the United States. A lot of times the reason for inadmissibility, including the Mariel Cubans cases this Court heard last month, is -- is convictions committed in the United States.
 May -- may I interrupt this --
 Now, surely the context --
 -- this colloquy to raise another question, if I may? Would you concede that there are some tribunals in the world that are comparable to what you might call a kangaroo court that Congress would not have intended to include within the term court?
 Yes, Justice Stevens. And I think that's an important thing here. There has been no contest, for obvious reasons -- we're dealing with Japan -- as to what Congress meant by court. And sometimes if it's Saddam Hussein's --
 And how are we to decide whether such tribunal should be treated as a court within the meaning of the statute when there is no statutory definition of the term court?
 Through traditional rules of statutory construction. I think that would involve looking at the other -- the -- the background that Congress would have enacted the statute against, first of all, and that -- that may well have -- it may not have been courts of just the United States because, as we know, Congress twice deleted that limitation from the statute.
 But if you concede that there are some tribunals that are not courts within the meaning of the statute, are you not conceding that the word court is inherently ambiguous?
 I -- I am -- I am conceding that -- that it has to be given meaning. I don't know that I would call it ambiguous, if we have to figure out. But I -- what I will say is that the phrase --
 But it's something less than the all-inclusive term, any court, in a literal sense.
 Any -- it has to be -- it has to be a court capable of entering convictions. I don't -- I don't think it's ambiguous in a sense --
 Well, I mean, it doesn't -- it's -- it's not a tennis court or an inner court. (Laughter.)
 Right.
 If -- if somebody asked where this man was convicted, they'd say in a Japanese court.
 Right. And -- and I think, in addition, we don't decide that a word is ambiguous just at looking at that word. We would look at the overall structure of the statute, and we would decide that it has to be a governmental entity capable of entering convictions.
 You didn't really have a chance --
 I assume that there's some prosecutorial discretion in the application of this statute. I mean, have you --
 Absolutely, Justice --
 -- have you prosecuted any -- any woman who tried to buy a firearm because she had been convicted of wearing -- not -- not wearing a veil?
 No, Justice Scalia.
 Do you think any United States attorney would do that?
 I would hope not, Justice Scalia. I think --
 Or -- or somebody who was convicted of treason in Cuba? You -- you think that -- that that would be a -- a case that would be prosecuted vigorously by a United States attorney?
 I -- I wouldn't think so. I think --
 Do you know any cases in which we've construed a statute narrowly on the ground that we're confident the prosecutor won't bring any such cases?
 That -- well, again, just last -- this isn't -- this isn't quite the same context. But just this -- just last term in the Cheney case, this Court recognized the limitations on prosecutors. And in Atwater v. City of Lago Vista, in determining the scope of the Fourth Amendment and the capacity to arrest for misdemeanors, this Court recognized that not all checks have to come from the courts. They can come from the political process here. And it's very important to keep in mind that these hypothesized problems, bad applications, are that. Purely hypothesized. This has been on the books for almost 40 years.
 But it's -- it's been on the books for so long with very, very few prosecutions. So it's one -- it's not exactly an urgent question. But it does seem to me if this -- this problem had been brought to the attention of Congress, they would have defined the term court, and I don't -- they haven't done that but probably because they didn't think of the problem. And you can argue, well, they surely would have wanted to have this particular person prosecuted, but would they have wanted everyone with every foreign court all over the world. That's the question.
 And in Beecham v. United States, in Justice O'Connor's opinion for the Court, this Court recognized there -- it was dealing with another issue, whether the jurisdiction that restores civil rights is different from the convicting jurisdiction. It said we don't have any way of knowing whether Congress thought about that. That's not the question. Congress passed a statute here. It passed a statute that's been written very carefully. It's passed a statute where the definition of the word any in the statute has already been defined. And the -- what the statute has been used for is to prosecute exactly the people that Congress wanted to capture. It's international gun smugglers --
 Ms. --
 -- violent assailants --
 Well, Ms. -- Ms. Millett, my -- my problem with that argument and I guess my basic problem with -- with the case is Congress did not just sort of stop when it got to the point that would support your Lewis argument. It went a step -- it went several steps further. But one of the steps further that it went to was -- was in -- in a certain fussiness about the definition of crime, and it said, well, we want to make sure that -- that no State or -- or Federal business criminals are -- are put at a disadvantage by this. It then accepted anything that a State might call a misdemeanor if it carried no more than 2 years. And it just seems very odd to me that Congress would have been that careful in putting these limitations on State and Federal crimes and would totally have ignored any category of crime under foreign law, any conviction under foreign law in -- in light of some of the hypotheses that have been thrown out this morning. It just seems strange that it would have ignored foreign law and foreign courts if it thought they were included.
 I don't think it's strange at all, Justice Souter, and that is because that the business exception, if I can call it that, is a carve-out. What you have here, in this Court's word, is a sweeping prophylaxis against the misuse of firearms. That's what this Court called it in Lewis, a sweeping prophylaxis. And what Congress did was back out --
 Well, it called it that, but it didn't -- it didn't have this issue in front of it.
 That's -- that's right.
 I -- I realize you've got the language, but it -- it wasn't addressing this issue.
 Right, and -- and the language should be what counts most. But beyond that, you're talking about Congress --
 Well, I was talking about our language.
 Right. You --
 But -- and I think that ought to count for a lot too. (Laughter.)
 Well, not too much.
 But what Congress was doing there was backing out. It was making an exception, and it was doing this against a backdrop of a lot of violence with guns. And so it makes sense that Congress would proceed carefully and deal with matters with which it was familiar and not want to carve out things that it wasn't familiar with.
 No, but how -- how familiar an example is it that price-fixers would -- would be placed in -- in a terrible position if they couldn't carry guns? I mean, that was not a pressing problem, so far as I know. And yet, Congress dealt with it.
 Well, the problem --
 And if it can deal with a problem that is as little pressing as that, it seems odd that it would not have averted in any way to equally non-pressing problems under -- under foreign convictions if that's what they had in mind.
 It dealt with that. I mean, specifically at the legislative history level, it dealt -- it enacted that statutory exception because some States had made these types of business crimes punishable by more than a year. So that's what it was responding to.
 All right. What -- what --
 I can't -- I --
 No. I -- finish your answer.
 I can't -- I'm not going to stand here and tell you that Congress specifically thought about this.
 Oh, there's no --
 Right, but --
 We both know there's no --
 But -- but what Congress did here -- and it's very important to understand -- it was throwing a broad net --
 Ms. Millett.
 All right.
 Ms. Millett, there are many lawyers in Congress and at least the law students of my generation -- some of them are of that elder age. We learned in law school one country doesn't enforce the penal judgments of another. This is a kind of enforcement of a penal judgment of another, not exactly, but something like it. Another reason why I would expect a Congress, knowing that background norm, would say, when it meant foreign, foreign. Unlike the context of the immigration, yes, there are some people who left and came back, but many -- and -- and we have all this whole line of cases. Is adultery a crime of moral turpitude, and you know, those go back to the '20's. But this, which came about only because of the merger of two statutes, one saying Federal and State, the other not, and no explanation at all, in light of all these anomalies that have been brought out. Shouldn't we say to Congress maybe that's what you meant, but if you did, you have an opportunity to say so before we read in foreign?
 Two answers, Justice Ginsburg. First, this was the second time in 1986 that Congress refused to include that limitation on courts. The prior law, before the 1968 act, specifically referred to courts of the United States, States, and territories. It did not pick up that language in title IV in 1968, and they took it out --
 But neither did it give any explanation for not carrying it forward.
 No, but I don't -- that --
 It's -- it's the silence at the -- at the time it -- it apparently departed from the practice of predecessor statutes that -- that seems to be a problem for your argument.
 But -- but again, I don't think this Court has ever characterized as silence Congress' twice deletion of language from a statute in 1968 and again in 1986. It had it. It looked at it. It took it out. And in 1986 in the Senate report that you were referring to, Justice Ginsburg, earlier, Congress said they -- the conference report said we are rejecting the Senate's definition of felony. The other thing to keep in mind is when Congress enacted this statute in 1968, it also enacted an administrative mechanism for relief that would deal with exactly the uncomfortable situations that have been identified. 925(c) allows an administrative waiver in cases where an individual comes and says I don't want to --
 You know, this is a very interesting case because there are three ways to answer the question of what is a court. You can leave it up to us to do it, and that would be judicial legislation to fill in a hole in the statute. You can have the executive do it, decide what case -- what cases to prosecute, or if we should knock out this -- interpret the statute in the -- in a different way than you urge, Congress would then do it. Now, which of the three is the better lawmaker on deciding which is the -- what should the meaning of the word court be? The executive, the legislature, or the judiciary?
 I think -- it's, of course, the legislature and the President's signature. I'd like to put a plug in for the executive in -- in that reference, but --
 That would save us a lot of work. We -- (Laughter.)
 -- we could just invalidate all statutes that we don't understand. (Laughter.)
 But, Justice Kennedy and Justice Stevens, the important thing to keep in mind here is we don't just have a statute that appeared out of nowhere. It's been on the books for a long time and there was a legislative --
 No, but it is pretty clear that Congress didn't really think about this problem.
 No, but it thought -- it --
 And it is also clear on your side that they would like to prevent this guy from having a gun.
 Exactly, and --
 So there are two competing considerations, both of which are very powerful.
 Well, if nothing else -- and this guy is squarely within what Congress wanted to capture. If nothing else, you don't have to decide anything more in this case than that it covers persons like this whose convictions are fundamentally fair and it's not contested and could leave for another day -- but let's --
 Can I -- I want to get you. Now, I have a new question.
 Would -- would you finish -- would you finish please --
 Well, I have a new --
 -- telling us about the administrative waiver proceeding? You were in the middle of it and I never heard the --
 That's exactly what I wanted to know.
 Right.
 And I -- can I -- that's exactly what I wanted to know. When a person comes in to get a gun -- because I hadn't focused on this, and it actually to me it's relevant. Suppose one of these people has been convicted in a foreign court and he doesn't have a clue, you know, that this means he can't buy a gun over here. So he comes over here. He goes into a -- a gun store. Now, does he get notice that that -- this conviction over in Japan or Lithuania or wherever it was means that he can't buy the gun?
 Well, he got -- in this case, he got -- and this is --
 No. I'm asking -- I'm asking in general.
 You -- you go and you fill out a form that says, as this case did -- and it's on page 4 of our brief --
 Yes.
 -- asked him, have you been convicted in any court of --
 So it just says any court.
 In any court. And I think when someone --
 Well --
 No. But when someone has a conviction, when you have a felony conviction, you're on some notice of inquiry.
 It'll work for -- yes. It'll -- it'll work for this one, but -- but what I'm worried about -- and really what led the Sentencing Commission to exclude all this stuff even though clearly recidivists should get a higher sentence, but we still excluded it because it's just a nightmare. There are notice problems. There are fairness problems. There are procedural problems. There are problems of crimes that aren't crimes here.
 Justice --
 And -- and all those come up, and that's what I'm worried about. So I see this as a possible out.
 Well --
 The one -- the procedure you just talked about might help.
 And it's in 925(c), which is on --
 That he knows about it.
 -- page 65a of our brief. But let me -- let me be --
 And it provides judicial review of the Attorney General's failure to give the waiver.
 It does, and -- but let me be candid up front. Congress stopped funding this administrative mechanism in 1992, and that -- this Court addressed that in the Bean case. It -- it doesn't exist now, but that was 25 years after Congress wrote this language and put it in the statute, and the fact that they stopped funding it 25 years later doesn't mean the statute doesn't mean what it said.
 Do you know why?
 And Congress --
 Do you know why they stopped funding it? Why did -- because I think that's been reenacted every year. No money for this. Why -- why did Congress stop funding it?
 Because some of -- some of the people who were getting waivers were going out and committing crimes again. Congress here is very concerned about public safety. And this is not -- there was, you know, the question, is there ever an element where you treat this like an element of foreign crime. There aren't -- there aren't crimes normally where you treat indictments or someone being under a restraining order this way. This is not punishing you for your foreign crime. This is a global categorical, class-wide judgment that as a class persons who have committed crimes overseas are more dangerous and may pose exactly the public safety risk we wanted to grab and stop. As a class, they do that. In a particular case, it may not. In a particular case, an indictment might not. Congress was speaking globally. It did so. It threw a broad net. It did so at the time it had an administrative check to deal with these problems. Yes, that's gone. That doesn't retroactively change what the statutory language meant. This Court has said time and time again that this statutory language in 922 was written, in Beecham and Huddleston, with such care that Congress was focused on the difference between the present perfect and the past tense, this Court said in Barrett. This is not sloppy writing. When Congress put any court in and did not carry forward a limitation to the courts of the United States and took that out in another part of the statute in 1986, we have to assume that Congress knew what it was doing. If there are problems here, there is a political process to deal with it. The political process has taken away the administrative waiver. But there has not been -- this hypothesis of bad applications has not arisen. It's hypothesized. And what this statute has -- has been used to do is capture exactly the people Congress wanted to capture. It got exactly the ones who should be disarmed.
 Do you know anybody in the Justice Department you might talk to to amend this form so that the form says this includes convictions in foreign countries?
 I -- I am confident that the ATF would be happy to do that. As of now, the ATF has a regulation on the books for someone to look at and see that includes foreign convictions in this definition. And I think when someone has been convicted, they're on notice. Thank you, Justice Stevens.
 Thank you. The case is submitted.
 Mr. Kaplan, you may proceed.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: I received word that the Court is interested in 46 U.S.C. 801, and I intend to focus my attention on that before I get into my argument. 46-801 is referred to as the Shipping Act, and it was enacted in 1916 and the amendment in 1918. At that time, the United States Government was involved in a war and we were interested in developing the merchant marine for purposes of transporting cargo, equipment, and people back and forth. And so the amendment that was filed was fashioned after exactly 1 U.S.C. 3, but it had some additional features involved, one of which was that a vessel that was under construction was included as part of the act, one of which was if the owner intended to use the vessel for transportation, it was included. It is under no circumstances affecting a Jones Act claim because the Jones Act requires, number one, a vessel in navigation and it can't be on the dock or being under construction, and if it was under construction, it wouldn't have a crew. So under the circumstances, with all due respect, it is our judgment that we -- we would win on both sides. The Super Scoop would indeed, qualify under that act as well as under 1 U.S.C. 3. But we think that this goes a little too far and not appropriate.
 Is the Super Scoop practically capable of transportation on water, counsel?
 It is more than practically capable, it actually is -- actually transports its equipment and its personnel at work and its --
 Didn't it come from the west -- did it come from the west coast originally?
 Indeed, it did. It came through the west coast, unmanned, however. It came from the west coast through the Panama, through the Gulf, up the east coast, and, sir, if anything had occurred on that trip, that -- that would have been considered a vessel. However, when it came in to Boston --
 But there was nobody on it in that trip.
 Sorry.
 There was nobody -- there was no one on it --
 In fact, it's unmanned.
 -- to be injured.
 There was nobody injured and unmanned, yes, indeed. But what -- what I'm saying is historically there has never been a decision in which a dredge was not considered a vessel until this case that we appear here now. Of course, I'm here to seek to have you overrule the decision that was rendered. But more importantly, we are having a morass in the lower courts, and I'm here to try and persuade this Court to establish, once and for all, that there is a standard, that there is a definition for the use of the word vessel under the Jones Act. Now, in 1920, when the Jones Act was enacted, there was no reference to the use of the word vessel, and we know that when that happens, we have to seek to find what was the meaning, what was the established meaning at that time. And the way we do that is to look first to statutory law, and in addition we look to case law. The statutory law is clear. In 1873 in the revised statutes it makes it very clear that section 3 describes a vessel is any watercraft that -- or other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, for transportation on water. With that standard in 1873, this Court in 1907 tried the case of Ellis v. the United States and did apply that revised statute and decided that the dredges that were working in the city of -- in the Boston Harbor were indeed vessels and that the --
 Well, now, that -- that definition, used or capable of being used -- right, now. After one of the hurricanes, I saw a -- a tugboat that had just been washed up on shore down in the Gulf. What if somebody -- some enterprising person had fitted that out like a -- like a diner, you know, a -- a restaurant and they have staff in the diner and they're serving the meals off of this boat? Now, the boat, apart from the fact that it's a couple of hundred yards inland, is capable of being -- still capable of being used. Are the employees of that diner covered by the Jones Act?
 Very interesting question, Justice Scalia. However, this Court --
 It -- it goes to whether we want to use, you know, section 3 as -- as our definition.
 This Court seemed to have focused right on point in the cases of Cope in -- Cope was early, 1903, and in the case of Evansville in 1926 when they added the two words, practically capable. The Cope case was a dry-dock and it was run into by somebody and they sought damages. And the Court -- this Court said, wait a minute. In that case, that's a dry-dock. It goes up and down. It doesn't navigate. It doesn't transport people or cargo over water. So they said it's not practically capable of fulfilling under the revised statute. The easiest case is 1926 when this Court again in Evansville made it very clear that a wharf boat, which on occasion was taken out. Once a year, I think the evidence is, they would take it out and move it back. But it was affixed to the land. It had its telephone. It had its sewage. It had all connections to the land. And this Court again used 1 U.S.C. 3, but did say that it wasn't practically capable of performing.
 Is that what we would say about all these gambling casino boats that are parked on the side of the Mississippi River?
 Your Honor, these are a problematic case, and the whole thing is determined on whether or not it's in navigation. If a vessel is --
 What's your answer? There are lots of these gambling boats that are parked --
 If the --
 -- along the side of the river.
 If the gambling boat has lost its ability to be in navigation, if it's affixed to the land, if it has connections to the land, if it doesn't expect to go into navigation, it is out of navigation. It's owner has taken that vessel from a navigable vessel into out of navigation.
 And then what is the standard you use, the definition to use to get to that result? Is this your practically point again?
 Say that again, please.
 You've given us the answer. What's the standard that you use to get to that answer? Do you go back to the definition that it -- it cannot practicably be used?
 Well, the standard that I'm seeking to have the Court employ is 1 U.S.C., section 3, which says, any -- a vessel is any watercraft or other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used --
 And then -- and then the riverboat -- it depends on how -- how permanently it's affixed to the land. Suppose it stays there for 10 years. It -- it can go anytime, but it stays there for 10 years.
 If in fact it stays there for 10 years and it does not move, that's evidence that the owner intended that vessel to lose its position in navigation.
 So there's an intent component to your test now?
 There -- there -- technically one could say break the bonds that hold it to the dock and then take it out and use it because once a vessel, always a vessel? The answer is no. According to this Court, this Court said --
 Mr. Kaplan?
 -- when it's not practically capable of doing it.
 Mr. Kaplan, you said two things and I -- I'm wondering whether these are separate or they're really one concept. I thought your answer was going to be to the boat that is used as a diner or to the casino that's tied up to the land, that it's not in navigation. It may satisfy the 1 U.S.C. definition of vessel, but it has to be in navigation to be covered by the Jones Act. So I thought that's what you would -- something that's taken out of navigation would not qualify.
 The answer is no. It -- it does not qualify if it's removed from navigation. Once the vessel is taken out of navigation, as in Justice Scalia's situation where that vessel is on the land, it is being used as a completely different --
 So you say it is a vessel. I thought your answer before was that it was not a vessel because it's not practically capable of being used.
 I say it's not a vessel. It's out of navigation.
 I -- I like Justice Ginsburg's answer better. (Laughter.)
 It is a vessel but it's not in navigation. Then you could stick with the -- with the section 3 definition. It's capable of being used, so it's a vessel, but --
 But then the question is whether or not it's in navigation at the time of the accident.
 And that only applies --
 And -- and that is a rule that, I take it, you do not wish us to adopt, or maybe you do.
 I'm trying to establish that if it's in navigation, then it is a vessel. If the owner of that vessel removed it from any chance of navigation, made it a different kind of a vessel, it is no longer in navigation. It remains a vessel, but it's not a vessel in navigation.
 No, but doesn't -- doesn't that put you right back in the problem, the original problem, with -- with the riverboat? If all it is is tied up, it isn't permanently taken out of navigation. It isn't precluded. All they've got to do is cast the lines off and it's out in the water so that the riverboat is the vessel and presumably we've got seamen working on it.
 Justice Souter, if on that situation where all they have to do is cast the lines off and go out to sea, then of course it remains a vessel, and it remains in navigation. And it is -- it fits all the elements of the requirements. But if that --
 So you're saying -- and I -- I don't mean to disagree with you. You're saying, yes, there are going to be a few tough results under this definition.
 There may be, but there's got to be some practically capable influence that this Court has already focused on to say whether that particular vessel is practically capable of being in navigation. If it's out of navigation, it's never going to be back in navigation, and there's nothing more that's going to happen to that as a vessel, then of course it's no longer a vessel that would qualify.
 So -- so what is -- I see the First Circuit as trying to grapple with the very question you're raising, which is I think difficult.
 Yes.
 Of course, it seems to me fine, let section 3 apply. No problem so far with me. But that is so broadly stated that if you read it literally, my garage door is a boat or a vessel because, after all, it's capable of being used in navigation, if worst came to worst. And now you're trying to narrow it to get out of that absurd result. Well, so did the First Circuit. That's what they were trying to do, and you got caught up in it. But that's -- so -- so what -- that's why I think we're struggling with the words, and -- and perhaps practically -- if you mean by practically that it is not practically capable of navigation, even though it really is, if it just hasn't been used for navigation for a long, long time and has connections to the land like Jimmy's Harborside probably or -- or --
 Like the establishments from the --
 What?
 -- pier 4, yes.
 Yes, yes, or one like that. But is -- are those the words? Do we need some other words as well? We say practically capable but practically capable has a technical meaning here that it means if there's a close to permanent connection to the land, it doesn't apply?
 Justice Breyer, we're talking primarily of Jones Act.
 Yes.
 Jones Act requires a relationship between the worker and the vessel. So --
 So could we say -- could we say that, as well, it must be unlike my garage door? A, it must be a -- a structure that normally would have a crew or that -- a significant amount of the time. We would have a connection to the water. It would be capable of having a master or crew. What about that?
 This Court has already established --
 -- what the standards are for Jones Act, whether a person qualifies. There are filters between whether a person is a Jones Act seaman or not. For example, there has to be a vessel. There has to be a vessel in navigation. There has to be a economic relationship between the worker and his vessel and he has to contribute towards the mission or to the function of that vessel. He has to, more importantly, have a substantial relationship to his vessel, both with respect to duration and with respect to nature.
 When you say the function of the vessel, do you mean the function of the vessel in its transportation function?
 Yes.
 So that would be the answer to the riverboat problem. You'd say sure, if the -- if the riverboat is capable simply of being let go in the water by casting off lines, the riverboat is a vessel. But you don't have to worry about turning all the -- the croupiers and the waiters into seamen because they're not contributing to the transportation function of the vessel.
 Precisely.
 I mean, is that the way out of the problem?
 Precisely? So then the --
 There is a safeguard between the vessel and whether a person qualifies as a Jones Act seaman on that vessel.
 So you -- you think that the person who operates the dredge, since he's not navigating the vessel, is not covered by the Jones Act?
 Oh, I do not. I do not, indeed. I say --
 You do not what? Do not think he's covered by the Jones Act?
 I say he's covered by the --
 He is covered. Well, then why isn't the croupier covered?
 Why isn't what?
 Why isn't the croupier covered, you know?
 Is the croupier contributing to the function of the vessel?
 That vessel's function is gambling. He sure is.
 It is.
 Does -- look, does the -- does the person in charge of the dredge control this process of pulling against anchor lines that moves it 8 feet or whatever it is?
 The manner in which the dredge -- this dredge worked -- by the way --
 No, but if you can give me a yes or no answer, give me a yes or no answer.
 Yes.
 Okay.
 That man controls not only --
 So that's why he's different from the croupier then, isn't he?
 The croupier does not control the motion.
 Right, and the -- the guy in charge of the dredge does control the movement of it.
 Absolutely.
 What if you have a very complicated dredge and it takes two people? One of them does nothing but -- but operate the steam shovel that pulls up the goop and puts it in the -- in the barges. Okay? And the other one moves the dredge. You say the one is -- is covered by the Jones Act and the other one isn't? No, it can't be. If the function of the vessel is dredging, anybody who is performing that function of dredging is covered by the Jones Act. Don't you believe that?
 I do believe that.
 Of course, you do. So the croupier is -- (Laughter.)
 Then what do you -- then what do you do with the croupier? You can't have it both ways.
 Well, if the croupier is participating in the navigation of the vessel, we don't care anymore.
 He's not participating in the navigation of the vessel.
 Well --
 He's doing whatever croupiers do. I don't know. (Laughter.)
 No, but --
 They don't hand me any money, I'll tell you. What I'm trying to establish here is that there really is a distinction between the law applicable to whether or not there is a vessel, and I'm suggesting that 1 U.S.C. clearly describes what a vessel is and should be for Jones Act purposes. The second part of the issue is whether or not the individual qualifies and is warranted to have the Jones Act coverage. So as to the vessel -- as to this coverage, we know, through Wilander and through Chandris, this Court has established some very sensible and good standards by which a person can or cannot be a -- a Jones Act seaman. Now the only thing that's necessary is we have to round the circle up to determine what is a vessel for Jones Act purposes. 1 U.S.C. seems to satisfy it. It's important to note that in this particular case this is a Coast Guard-certified, inspected vessel. This vessel is -- carries -- it has a 1290 ton itself and it carries cargo of 466 ton. It is -- it has navigation lights. It has to be ballasted. It has to be load-lined. When it goes to work, the way in which it moves is as follows. The tugs take the anchors out 50 feet. Now, as the operator is using that bucket to dump into the scows, he's also handling the -- the vessel is also moving through its own deck winches. They spool up on their own winches. So in addition to where he's digging, they're also moving so that instead of just digging a hole, they're digging the trench. So under all the circumstances, this Super Scoop, because it has a crew, a captain and a crew of 10, because they have to wear lifesaving devices, because they have a -- a standby vessel for safety purposes right there by order of the Coast Guard, because it is exposed to all the weather and navigation problems that exist in the -- in Boston Harbor, because the risks are inherent in this kind of work, this man qualifies as not only a vessel but as a Jones Act seaman.
 Is the scow a vessel too?
 I'm sorry. I didn't hear you.
 The scow. The --
 Oh, the scow.
 Well, what happened in this one, if Your Honor pleases, is when -- this was a collision at sea. Client was aboard the scow when it collided with the Super Scoop and he was tossed down a 10-foot --
 I know the circumstances of the accident. And you're -- you're discussing whether Super Scoop was a vessel. I'm asking if the scow where the injury occurred is a vessel.
 Oh, indeed. The scow is -- is what they put the fill in, and as differentiated from a barge, a scow has the ability to open up its bottom to let all the fill out when they get out to sea.
 Yes, but you haven't told us whether you think it was a vessel or not.
 Pardon?
 Was -- was it a vessel?
 The scow is a vessel.
 The scow was.
 The scow is absolutely a vessel.
 Oh, that's not even close.
 Not even --
 I mean, it carries all this goop somewhere else to -- to dump it. Right?
 They had to move from here to somewhere else. That's --
 Then explain to me why --
 So did the Super -- sorry.
 -- why it wasn't the vessel that counts. If it's a vessel and it is in fact the place where he was injured and it was moving, it -- that would be an easy case, but somehow you have to deal with the Super Scoop, and I'm wondering why.
 Well, the Super Scoop was not moving at that moment, but the scow was moving --
 Well, why don't you just say the scow was a vessel? End of case. The scow was a vessel. It was moving. That's where he was injured.
 I would take that, Your Honor, but I would like to extend it to get a status -- a statement from this Court so that we can remove the indecisions, the silly tests that the lower courts have been creating for what is a vessel and what is not a vessel.
 Thank you, Mr. Kaplan. Thank you. Your time is up.
 Oh, my. Thank you.
 Ms. Blatt.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Justice Ginsburg, I take it the reason that the scow was not relied on is because the petitioner worked 99.9 percent of his time on the Super Scoop and petitioner never made the argument that he had a connection to the scow. But this case, the dredge, the Super Scoop, was a vessel in navigation and it's an easy case under both standards because it remained in service as a means of carrying its workers and equipment as it moved along the Boston Harbor.
 Do you think we need to use the word practical or practically in section 3?
 Yes. I mean, you've -- you've read it in into Evansville and Cope, the -- the dry-dock case, but it's -- it's basically referring to any mobile watercraft that is practically capable of moving either cargo or people.
 Why is that reading anything in? I mean, do -- do you think if -- if you were not practically capable, you would be capable?
 I don't -- I don't think it much --
 I don't regard that as a reading in at all. I mean, capable means capable. You're either capable or not. If you practically can't be moved, your're not capable.
 That's fine, and I think -- like I said, this is an easy case. If I could address some of the -- the --
 Why -- why is this an easy case? Because, after all, the First Circuit is struggling with the same problem and they came to the conclusion, use section 3. That's fine. But you know that the garage door is not a vessel, and you also know that Jimmy's Harborside is not a vessel. And you also know that Justice Scalia's beached scow or something is not a vessel. And I take it nor is a vessel a scow that's tied up for 364 days of the year and acts as a picnic place and one day they take it out to sea and -- because they want to move it across the harbor. I guess that isn't a vessel. Is it? Or maybe it is. So why is this so easy? Because the First Circuit --
 Justice Breyer, the --
 -- tries to make those distinctions.
 Right. The -- I respectfully disagree. The First Circuit was way off base. It did not use section 3 of title 1.
 All right. Let's say it's wrong about that.
 What it did is it --
 Now let's take section 3.
 Okay, let's -- okay, let's go from there.
 And taking section 3, it seems to me, we have the same problems.
 Let me -- let me answer your question.
 And I'd like to know your answer and you just said to Scalia what I thought -- Justice Scalia that I thought what was an answer isn't because I thought that word practical, as co-counsel recommended, has a rather specialized meaning where we get rid of a lot of these. Now you're saying no, it doesn't.
 I think the -- the -- you look at the physical characteristics and the surrounding circumstances of any type of watercraft, and if it's out there moving, I -- I think that really is an easy case. What I think is bothering -- what was bothering the First Circuit is that this vessel clearly had a stationary purpose. It had two essential and indispensable purposes, one of which was stationary and one of which was a mobile barge. The types of cases that raise problems under 1 U.S.C. 3 is you have things that meet the definition of vessel. The Coast Guard regulates them as vessels, but if they have no function to transport people or things -- and the best example is our country's battleships. They're basically retired vessels. They're museums. And there are some casino boats that function the same way. They have no transportation function. They've been withdrawn from navigation. If you want a legal standard for what in navigation is it's this. It's what the Court said in Chandris, which is it's the status of the ship, and that means does it have some -- is it still servicing as a ship.
 But that goes to in navigation --
 That's correct.
 -- not to whether it's a vessel or not. It is still a vessel even if it's beached up on land so long as it is capable of -- of floating. It's just not in navigation, isn't it?
 I agree. The only types of cases where a vessel would lose its status as a vessel if it's been basically -- there -- there are basically two kinds of cases where the casino boats or the museums or hotels have lost their status. And there are basically -- there are two examples. They're boats in a moat. They've been basically landlocked in through concrete or landfilled and they can't go anywhere. And the other one that's -- that's equally as common is pipes and stuff have been driven through the hull of the ship, and they're not practically capable of transporting anything. They'd have to be overhauled.
 Your -- your view of the word in navigation does all the work here. And so a -- a concert ship, which exists, which say is docked at a dock for, let's say, 300 days of the year or maybe 360, and those other 5 days they -- they move it from one town to the next town where it stays for another 4 months, that is in navigation or not?
 We think it's in navigation. If you have a --
 All right. So then --
 If it's --
 -- the concert master and the -- the -- all the orchestra players and everyone else are covered by the Jones Act even though, by the way, none of them has ever moved whatsoever.
 No, no. That's not correct. It just means it might be a vessel in navigation. You have cruise ships, military ships, pleasure crafts that sit all the time, some for years, but they're still ready for another voyage when and if they're needed. Those are still in navigation. Now, if you have --
 Well, if that's so, that's --
 I'm going to answer your question on the seaman. If you've got a worker that never goes to sea on a vessel in navigation, the place to deal with that is not by saying it's not a vessel or not that it's not in navigation. But this Court emphasized in the Harbor Tug and Barge case, as well as the Chandris case, that there has to be a substantial connection not only in duration but also with respect to nature. And the Court in Harbor Tug said that -- that inquiry will concentrate on whether the employee's duties take him to sea.
 Okay. In the case of the steam shovel operator on the dredge, do we say that -- that he contributes toward that function because it can't move unless he dredges first, so that the -- the whole object of moving across the harbor to dredge includes the -- the dredging part?
 No.
 Is that the way we do it?
 There's -- there's a decision in McDermott v. Wilander that expressly holds that the worker need not aid in the navigation of the ship.
 That's right.
 Bartenders, croupiers, waitresses, et cetera on cruise ships are all seamen. That's just the holding of McDermott v. Wilander. Now, there's still a separate question of whether they're exposed to the perils of sea.
 So as long as -- as long as somebody is -- is engaged in a navigation --
 In the ship's work --
 -- function, everybody else comes --
 -- whether that work is gambling or --
 Okay.
 But now we have, in my concert ship, the concert master and the whole orchestra covered by the Jones Act even if none of them, by the way, has ever been even to sea on that day when -- they take the train.
 Well, I just said that they may not be covered, but they --
 Because?
 They may not be covered --
 Because?
 They may not be covered if they fail the last requirement --
 But it says --
 -- of Chandris.
 -- in terms of both its duration and its nature, i.e., a connection to a vessel --
 Vessel in navigation.
 -- in navigation.
 Right, and I -- Harbor Tug v. Barge, which is a later opinion, explains that that test will look at whether the employee's duties take him or her to sea. Now, in this case the dredges operate not only -- only on the water, but they're out there usually away from shore and are engaged in regular movement over navigable waters. And the workers on that dredge, such as petitioner, are subject to the traditional perils of navigation which include not only collision with ships, but even capsizing. Barges such as dredges are particularly susceptible to capsizing because their distance between the deck of the barge and the water, which is known as the freeboard, is low. In this case it was only 5 feet, and they have a high center of gravity because of those derricks or cranes that are holding the bucket ship. And if it's operating in poor weather or for some reason it's overloaded, they can tip over and you have a marine incident or even casualties. And this worker was exposed to the perils of navigation like other traditional seamen. And this Court -- we think it's pretty telling that the Court basically in two decisions has resolved this case. You have already used 1 U.S.C. 3 in the Norton case in defining what is a vessel for purposes of the seamen exclusion in the Longshore Act. And then in the Ellis decision, this Court has already held that a dredge, including the scows that were accompanying that dredge, were vessels for purposes of 1 U.S.C. 3 and that the workers were seamen and that they were basically called upon to perform the duties, more or less, of ordinary seamen. And every other court that had looked at the issue and passed on it had equally held that dredges were vessels for a variety of maritime purposes. That was seamen's liens, limitation of liability, and -- and the overtime -- overtime laws in the Ellis case.
 Ms. Blatt, the -- there was a brief filed by Signal I think that argues that a Jones Act vessel has to provide food, care and lodging to be covered.
 Right. With due respect to the author, I think that approach is novel, it's radical, and it's unsubstantiated. Never has the definition of vessel turned on whether the watercraft has sleeping quarters.
 Are there problems in computing maintenance and cure in a case like this one?
 It's usually governed by the collective bargaining agreement. I think it's something like $40 a day, and this petitioner was a union laborer. And it's -- it's usually governed --
 Suppose it were just left up to the law. Are there problems in computing what cure and maintenance --
 There used to be, but in -- there used to be a debate, which I think most of the cases the Signal brief is relying on, in how long maintenance and cure goes for and it was a rather kind of arcane, tricky thing, but basically this Court resolved it in 1930. It goes to maximum cure, until the seamen can no longer be cured. And there used to be a debate about should it just go to the extent of the wage contract or to some longer point, and the Court resolved that. But there is no case that has ever even discussed the fact that a vessel turns on whether it has sleeping quarters. And we think that brief is also fatally undermined by the decision in Ellis and all the -- decision in Ellis already holding that vessels -- or the workers were seamen, and there was never been a discussion in those dredge cases about whether they had sleeping quarters. Several of those cases -- the most oft-cited one is that Saylor v. Taylor case out of the Fourth Circuit, was a maritime lien case, and those are exactly the type of workers that this Court in McDermott said were seamen who were intended to be covered under the Jones Act. If there are no questions, we would ask that the First Circuit's decision be reversed.
 Thank you, Ms. Blatt. Mr. Connelly.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This Court in Chandris and in Harbor Tug stated that the basic point of trying to be reached is to separate lien-based employees from sea-based employees. This Court also stated that was Congress' goal in passing the Jones Act. The Court wrote: the Jones Act remedy is reserved for employees whose work regularly exposes them to the special hazards and disadvantages to which they who go down to the sea in ships are subjected. The First Circuit's ruling is much more likely to get to that result. The goal that this Court stated was Congress' goal then is section -- excuse me -- 1 U.S.C., section 3. Justice O'Connor, your first question had to do with the casino boats, and that is a point that I was going to raise. Those casino boats are traditional vessels plying the rivers and used mostly in the Midwest and -- and the Great Lakes. Those States have recently over the last 3 or 4 years changed their law. The law had been that they had to go up to -- out into navigation. They've now changed them and said, no, you must stay dockside. All they are is tied up dockside. They can be untied and moved out at any time. The cases that -- and you're probably going to have some before you -- are dealing with dealers and waiters and waitresses who go aboard the casino boat and maybe fall down in the kitchen or something and are injured. They have never been on the boat while it was moved and it hasn't moved for the last several years.
 Well, that might affect the decision of whether they are seamen covered under the Jones Act. It might still be a vessel.
 Well --
 But there may be other aspects of the test that aren't met --
 But breaking it down --
 -- when the thing is tied up.
 Breaking it down, Your Honor, if the petitioner has his way, those tests are met. The first test is whether it's a vessel. It is a vessel. Second test, whether it's in navigation. The Government has just told you, and it states in its brief, any vessel that had any transportation purpose at all that is still not -- unless it's mothballed -- and I think they said today either pipes driven through it or in cement -- is a vessel in navigation. So it is a vessel in navigation. We know that the --
 I think it might be a vessel, but probably not in navigation while it's tied up or in mothballs.
 Again, Your Honor, all it is is tied to the pier. The Government has taken the position, as has petitioner, in their briefs and here today that it's still in navigation if it can be used.
 Yes, but I think what the Government has said is that though it's in navigation, we have a case that says that the -- that the seaman's connection to the ship has to be related to the functioning of the ship in navigation. He doesn't have to navigate it, but he has to be working at what the ship does in the course of its navigation, and a dredge operator does that.
 Well, I don't think a dredge operator does that any more than the waiter on the casino. The dredge operator -- the dredge is there to do construction work. It is there to dredge. The casino is there to have people gamble and serve them drinks.
 But isn't -- isn't that the point? The dredge is there necessarily to move. The casino is not there necessarily to move.
 Well, it is our position -- and as shared by some of the First Circuit -- that the movement of the dredge was incidental. Once --
 Should we clarify that? Because I don't -- I didn't read the case saying what Justice Scalia just said or what you -- what it says is that a seaman must have a connection to a substantial -- in terms of duration and nature connection to a vessel in navigation.
 Correct.
 Obviously, a croupier has such a connection.
 Correct, Your Honor.
 It doesn't say anything about being connected to the navigating part.
 That's correct, and this Court handled that in Wilander, Your Honor, that it said in --
 Not to the navigating part but to what the vessel is doing in the course of its being in navigation.
 If the term, Your Honor, in navigation, had the bite that I think it should have, then we may not be here today at all. The First Circuit was actually looking at the actual transportation function, assuming that it had to be into navigation. What the -- what the petitioner wants is 1 U.S.C., section 3 which looks at theoretical transportation, a mere capability. And Your Honor, I understand what you said, Justice Scalia, that to you, they're the same, practical capability or capability. But to the petitioner and the Government, they are far different. In both of their briefs, they have said that without the Evansville change in the language of the statute which adds practical capability, both have agreed that it is overly inclusive a statute, 1 U.S.C., section 3. It includes everything and including Justice Breyer's garage door.
 But as Mr. Kaplan pointed out, all -- the fact that something is a vessel doesn't mean there's Jones Act coverage, and I think Mr. Kaplan was getting to the perils of the sea. Someone who's working on a boat that is not in the water day in and day out is never exposed to the perils of the sea.
 Well, Your Honor, the perils of the sea, which this Court discussed at length in the Papai case, we -- we say that -- that is further evidence that Mr. Stewart is not entitled to Jones Act remedies. Mr. Stewart was on a construction site. It happened to be a work platform in site of land. He was never more than 500 yards off the coast. The dangers that he was up against were more akin to that of a construction worker or, at the very least, a harbor worker or a stevedore. They were not the same perils that are normally faced by a true seaman. Now --
 One peril was a collision with another vessel, and that's exactly what happened here.
 We disagree with that, Your Honor. This was a situation where the Super Scoop was -- was moored. It was anchored and stationary, again as a stationary work platform. The scow was just being brought from one side to the other alongside -- attached to it at all time by -- by cables and by the crane. The -- the -- he got jostled and he fell. No different than harbor workers and stevedores face everyday when they're unloading ships and working on harbors.
 Suppose there had been -- suppose there had been very rough water --
 They would have sent everyone home.
 -- and -- and the crane operator was the -- was operating it and the water came over the freeboard and it capsized. That's -- that would be the perils of the sea, wouldn't it?
 Well, because we are in the protected harbors of the -- of Boston Harbor --
 No. This is my -- this is a special day in Boston -- (Laughter.)
 -- which -- which they have --
 That happened a week ago.
 -- every 86 years or something. (Laughter.)
 It happens every -- every 86 years they have one of these storms. (Laughter.)
 Your --
 So far.
 Your Honor, I think in that -- in that -- using your hypothetical, it's a construction platform right off the coast. They'd send everyone home. If there was any trouble with the sea, the -- the greatest perils that are discussed in the petitioner's brief -- and they list them all -- one of them is isolation and far away from home and far from aid. Those don't apply to Mr. Stewart. Mr. Stewart would be sent home if there was too much -- the weather got bad. He would be sent home in a -- in a minute or 2. He lived right in Boston. He was in the middle of a large city. There was no major danger of isolation. That -- the Super Scoop was inspected regularly by the State, Federal, and Government officials and by the general contractor on the job. There was no isolation. All of the perils that have been listed by --
 And -- and by the Coast Guard.
 The Coast Guard also. I'm not sure they went out on a regular basis, but they did inspect the -- the Super Scoop at -- at some point. There's no question about that. This Court --
 You're not contending that anything that happens in a harbor is not exposed to the perils of the sea, are you?
 Oh, absolutely not, Your Honor. This Court in Cope and earlier cases has long equated a vessel with transportation. That's what the First Circuit did. They -- they needed a bright line. They chose a bright line, and the bright line was transportation. Is the structure primarily engaged in transportation or commerce? And navigation, transportation, and commerce are all intermixed, and -- and the definitions include each other. And they found that it was not primarily engaged in transportation. It was primarily a work platform doing construction.
 But how do you -- how can you possibly describe as a bright line test anything that says you have to identify the primary function? Plus, even if it's not its primary function, if it happens to be moving at the time of the accident, then there's coverage. That doesn't seem to me very bright line.
 Well, Your Honor, what it is, I believe, is a bright line test with an exception. And the Stewart case talked about the DiGiovanni exception, which falls very closely to -- to what Justice Stevens wrote in his concurring opinion in the Chandris case, that it is unfair that somebody who was actually injured while a -- a vessel or -- or structure is in actual navigation does not get at least a second bite at the apple and that that person cannot be -- said to be a Jones Act seaman.
 Even though the identical accident happens to his buddy 10 minutes before when the vessel isn't moving.
 Well, Your Honor, at no time during the 1 and a half years that Mr. Stewart was in the harbor, as far as we know from the record, was the Super Scoop in transportation. The incidental movement of -- of pulling forward a few feet with its anchors is not navigation or transport -- transportation. The First Circuit stated that the movement of the scow was both immaterial because, as the Government has already admitted, he wasn't tied to the scow. His -- his time was spent on the Super Scoop, but also incidental, Your Honor, because it was just slight movement along the site. It wasn't transportation or navigation. At no point -- and -- and the petitioner has put their spin on this that -- stating that Mr. Stewart every day he was out there moved in and out of coverage. That's not true. He was never in Jones Act coverage. And Your Honor --
 I -- I guess I could agree with you if -- if I believed that I had to look to the primary purpose, whether the primary purpose of the vessel was transportation. But what -- what do you do about gambling ships that, you know, they -- they sail out beyond the 2-mile limit and then come right back to where they left? Now, people get on board not to get transported. They get on board to gamble. And the purpose of the ship, the primary purpose of the ship, is gambling. You think that -- that -- the -- the seamen who -- who are on that ship, which regularly goes out beyond the 2-mile limit, you think that they're -- that they're not covered by the Jones Act?
 I think in that situation, Your Honor, it's -- it's a closer call, that they --
 I don't think it's close at all. I think they're obviously covered by the Jones Act.
 That is a traditional trip -- ship and those people are engaged in a form of transport --
 But -- but that's not the primary purpose of -- of the ship, just as the primary purpose of this scow is -- of -- of this dredge is not transportation.
 In that situation, Your Honor, it would be -- it would be a primary purpose, though, that transporting the people who happen to be gambling --
 Oh, a primary purpose? Now, you're getting a little fuzzy there. I thought you said the primary purpose.
 Well, in the First Circuit --
 It has to be a primary purpose.
 Well, in the Manuel court, the Fifth Circuit actually uses the term, a primary purpose.
 A. Oh.
 And -- and I think -- and to a degree that --
 And you think that's not fuzzy. (Laughter.)
 It's an -- it's an oxymoron, Your Honor. But what -- what the First Circuit was doing in -- in the Stewart case is -- is similar to what this Court did in Chandris. It was looking at a temporal view. A worker -- and the temporal view used by this Court in Chandris was looking at what the worker was doing. What were his duties? He isn't going to be denied Jones Act coverage because he happened to be an office worker 2 months before if his duties had changed and he was now a Jones Act seaman, nor if he fell in the office, after he had been reassigned to the office, was he going to gain Jones Act seaman status just because he spent the last 2 years on the vessel. That is what the First Circuit has done in terms of the vessel as well, not just the work but in terms of the vessel. Do not look at what this vessel did in the past. Do not look at what it did -- might do in the -- in the future. It's transportation from California through the Panama Canal up the east coast is immaterial. You should look at the worker who is claiming Jones Act status, his relationship to the structure and what the structure's purpose was and business was during that relationship. During the 1 and a half years that he was associated with it, it wasn't transporting anything. It was used as a -- a work platform only, only a structure, and it wasn't transporting anything during that time. The same thing with the casino boats, these individuals who go upon the casinos as a waitress and are never -- never leave the port, never leave the dock shouldn't be entitled to the special protections of the Jones Act. They face none of the perils of -- of the sea or of -- of perils of -- of navigation.
 There's a difference to this extent, would you agree, that something that's just tied up to the dock and never moves is different from something that is actually in the water and whether you call it transportation, it is moving? It has to move to engage in the construction of this tunnel.
 Well, Your Honor, this Court has decided, I believe it was in Chandris, that a -- a seaman doesn't lose his seaman status just because the vessel he's assigned to is now in -- in port. They wanted -- they didn't want a person to go in and out too many --
 Well, I'm just -- let's focus on what is a vessel because someone -- it may be a vessel but the injured person may not be a seaman. Those are two different things. This is only the first step. So when you're bringing in what the worker does, whether it's a croupier or whatever, the only question that we are considering is, is this dredge a vessel? We're not involved with the question of whether the worker is a seaman unless we pass that basic threshold.
 That's correct, Your Honor, but of course, the ultimate issue the Court is trying to arrive at is whether or not Mr. Stewart is a Jones Act seaman. And this Court has held for him to be a Jones Act seaman, it must be a vessel in navigation. I don't think that that can be separated, that just looking at a vessel. 1 U.S.C., section 3, which the petitioner wishes, of course, everything -- everything that floats that is capable of transportation is -- is a vessel. The First Circuit has -- has used a much more narrow definition but focusing on the purpose and primary use of the structure because it is trying to get to where this Court was trying to get. Is it a vessel in navigation?
 Is it -- is it the vessel that's the problem? Why -- why do you focus on the vessel? It seems to me most of your argument has gone to whether it's in navigation. Can you be a vessel that is not in navigation?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Of course, you can or you wouldn't have the -- the combination of the two terms appearing anywhere. So why isn't the problem here not whether it's a vessel but whether it's in navigation?
 Well, again, Your Honor, if -- if in navigation means what it should mean, which is an instrument for transportation or commerce over navigable waters, and not simply as the petitioner and the Government want it to mean that anything that once might have been in navigable waters and stays in navigable waters and isn't mothballed is still in navigation -- if it means what it should mean, then that's something I think the First Circuit is -- was trying to get to anyway. They -- they were looking at it in terms of vessel status, vessel in navigation versus just in navigation. They -- they were trying to get there and that's why they used what is really a -- a temporal look and looked at what was the business use.
 Well, exactly. And -- and in Chandris, this Court rejected the snapshot approach to determining what's a vessel and the First Circuit seemed to go back to that. And certainly what the First Circuit did seems in serious tension with this Court's cases. It just didn't follow the same line that we had outlined.
 The First Circuit does -- the First Circuit rule, Your Honor, in DiGiovanni and Fall and Stewart does have a snapshot exception.
 Yes.
 There's the main rule which has a bright line --
 Right, and that was rejected by this Court in Chandris. So I -- I think there's a problem here.
 Well, Your Honor, there -- there are always -- and this is answering Justice Ginsburg's question earlier as well. There are always going to be difficult situations where some people, doing the exact same work, using the same equipment on the same structure, some are covered and some are not, a situation where one has the requisite connection 30 or 40 percent to a vessel, the other person doing the same work next to him only has 10 percent. One is covered.
 Yes, but it might be much simpler to rely on 1 U.S. Code, section 3 and our -- our definition, as we've described it there, and then deal with other situations within the framework of the definition of seaman and the other issues that arise. And it seems like the First Circuit went backwards from Chandris back to Giovanni which basically had been rejected. So that's the concern.
 Your Honor, again, I -- I think that if 1 U.S.C., section 3 is adopted, then every vessel capable --
 Congress adopted that.
 Well, I don't -- I don't agree, Your Honor. The way -- the way we look at the congressional intent -- this Court has already decided in -- in several cases that Congress left it to the Court to decide which persons are -- should be granted Jones Act seaman status. This is what the Court has said. Why then would the Congress in -- in the same statutes have sort of handcuffed the Court by saying it's for you to decide who's a Jones Act seaman and who's entitled to those special protections, but we're going to handcuff you and -- and say this is what you have to decide as far as vessel is concerned? 1 U.S.C., section 3 was not followed. I should also point out that the petitioner is a recent convert to this position, and it -- it hasn't been followed in the circuits at all. There isn't a lot of cases out there where a lot of circuit judges have stated section 3 should be the definition for the Jones Act.
 If -- if you go -- I thought vessel -- the word vessel appears in our cases. It doesn't appear in the Jones Act. Am I right or not about that?
 It does not appear in the Jones Act --
 All right. So we have a degree of freedom on this. But -- but the -- the question then is, is it -- how -- I'm getting the impression from you and -- and from the SG that it's rather deeply embedded in the law, if we start reading the Fifth Circuit cases, that if we define X as a vessel, automatically it is a vessel in navigation, that the cases have said the word in navigation mean nothing, with one exception. The exception is if you actually have like a physical cemented connection to the land so they can't escape. Otherwise, if it's just tied up at a dock, even if it never goes to sea, those words, in navigation, have no meaning. If it's a vessel, it's a vessel in navigation. If it's my garage door, my garage door, which can float, is a vessel in navigation. Now, how accurate is that assumption I'm now making? What would I read in the law? Is that definition of in navigation as meaning virtually nothing really embedded in the law?
 It is pursuant to what -- the petitioner and the Government's view.
 I know it is but what is your view?
 My view is that it shouldn't be, that it should have some bite to it. It should mean, as -- as I stated before, an instrument of commerce or transportation over navigable waters. But that's not what it has come to mean in a lot of the circuits below. It has come to mean something that's just simply in navigable waters no matter how many years it has gone without --
 Well, would it help? Suppose we were to say it was -- had to be capable, at least, of having a captain and crew?
 I have never thought of that, Your Honor.
 Then we better not do anything for the first time. (Laughter.)
 Your Honor, I think in that in that situation, there are -- there can be vessels involved with transportation, getting back to the Cope case and other cases, where there -- it's -- it's a barge being towed, but it's transporting things. We're not disputing that. I don't think it needs to have a captain and crew necessarily to be a -- considered a vessel in navigation. But you hit the nail on the head, Your Honor, and that's -- that's where the First Circuit was befuddled in -- in trying to come up with a regional -- reasonable test because they're dealing with this situation where it seemed like everything is a vessel in navigation. And yet, that doesn't serve Congress' intent of only persons who face the perils of the sea are entitled to the special protections under the Jones Act.
 The -- the word vessel does appear in the Longshore and Harbor Workers Compensation Act.
 Correct, Your Honor.
 And this is the -- the only purpose of the vessel inquiry that we're involved in is to -- to say is this person within one injury compensation scheme or another.
 Correct.
 Now why, in making that inquiry, should the courts go off on their own and be inventive and come up with a definition when Congress has given a definition that can be used by default? If Congress thinks it should be other than the general definition they have provided, Congress can also do that. But in the meantime, why should the courts go creating definitions instead of using the one that's right there in the statute book?
 Because this Court effectively overruled the definition or decided not to use it in the Evansville case. It saw in that case that it would not just rely on the section 3 language. It would add the word practically, practically capable, and -- and not just capable because the Court saw that in Evansville the wharf boat, which they determined was not a vessel, even though again not dealing with the Jones Act, it was capable of transportation, but it wasn't practically capable of transportation. So the --
 Was the Court then --
 -- the Court has decided --
 -- just construing --
 -- not to follow section 3.
 -- just construing instead of not following, but say by capable, Congress must mean practically capable.
 Your Honor -- and I realize that is what Justice Scalia said earlier. The position of the petitioner, as he stated as he was standing here not too many minutes ago, was that they seek to have the Court employ 1 U.S.C., section 3, not the Evansville change to that section. They -- they see it as quite different and it's in both of their briefs, that Evansville did change 1 U.S.C., section 3. The petitioner's position is that this Court is bound by -- to follow 1 U.S.C., section 3 because Congress says so. It is our position that they're not so bound. If you're bound -- if you're not bound, why take a faulty definition such as section 3 and try to change it a little bit? You're -- you're free to as -- as you are, to determine who is a Jones Act seaman. You're free to determine what is a vessel in navigation or a vessel pertaining to the -- the Jones Act. 1 U.S.C., section 3 was never referenced in the Longshore Act. Congress at that time, many years before and many years after, has passed many statutes in which vessel is defined. Sometimes they reference section 3; other times they write in a definition. Sometimes it's similar to section 3, sometimes quite different. In this case -- for the Longshore Act, they decided to leave it to the courts. The Jones Act was passed in 1920. Its predecessor was the Act of 1915. That act did have a definition of vessel that was very restrictive and actually talked about actual navigation. In 1920, the Merchant Marine Act was passed and it -- that portion of it had a very large definition, which was already discussed earlier, the Shipping Act definition. The Jones Act didn't adopt that one and it didn't adopt the one in 1915. The -- the Longshore and Harbor Workers Act was passed in 1927. Certainly by that point they knew that they had just jettisoned two definitions 7 years before. They chose again to leave it to the courts. In 1972 and again in 1984, there were considerable amendments that Congress did to the Longshore Act. At that time, they certainly knew -- and there's always been heavy -- heavy lobbying going on in Congress every time that they try to touch the Longshore Act or -- or the Jones Act. They knew by that point in time that the circuits were not using section 3 as the definition for Jones Act vessel. Again, they chose to leave it to the courts. They did not intercede and then reference section 3 or incorporate a definition like it or something. They again chose not to. In 1920, section 3 was certainly not the only definition of vessel. Benedict on Admiralty, which this Court has cited several times, which the petitioner has cited, had a completely different definition of -- of vessel, and that could have been the one that Congress had in mind. I realize it's always dangerous to mention the Congressional Record, but most of the people who spoke in 1920 and again in -- mainly in 1927 were discussing traditional vessels and vessels on a voyage. If they had true seamen in mind, they probably had more of a traditional vessel in mind. Also looking at the record, when the House wanted to include everybody, all seamen, into the Longshore Act, they listed out various structures such as dredges and barges. Obviously, a compromise was reached with the Senate, and when the act was passed, they limited it, not just seamen and -- and but only to masters and members of crews of vessels. They limited it to that and left it, of course, to the courts to decide who is entitled to the Jones Act status. If I may have a second, Your Honor. The term vessel can and often has had a different meaning for the Jones Act, which this Court has stated is a vessel in navigation, than it does with the Longshore and Harbor Workers Act. In his amicus brief filed on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Hillsman writes that the lower court unanimously -- unanimously -- have decided that the definition of vessel for purposes of the Longshore Act is much, much more inclusive than it is for the Jones Act, and it has worked perfectly fine. Under the Longshore Act, most of the persons who collect Longshore benefits only have to show it's a maritime nexus. There's no vessel requirement from almost all of the claims under the Longshore Act. Another point I wish to make is that both the First Circuit and the petitioner talked about a bright line test. The First Circuit, though, test is dealing with actual transportation, the actual use in business of the structure during the time that the person who is claiming special status is associated with it. More confusing is dealing with 1 U.S.C., section 3, which although bright is also very broad and would include everything. Anything that floats or is capable of floating would be included under that. There are always going to be situations, no matter what definition the Court comes up with -- always situations where a person would have to be covered under both acts, and I realize in the Chandris case, it was the goal of the Court to say we'd like to make it clear as we -- we can. We don't want people going in and out of Jones Act status. However, as this Court saw in Gizoni, a perfect example -- in Gizoni, the person was a harbor worker. This Court sent it back to the lower court saying -- the lower court had said you're a harbor worker. That's your label. You're in the harbor workers' union. You're not entitled to -- for Jones Act status. This Court said no, send it back, let's take another look. The person, although a harbor worker, may have had the requisite connections to a vessel in navigation to be able to claim Jones Act seaman status. Obviously, in that situation, which is a perfect example, the -- the employer would have had to cover him under the Longshore Act and if -- if the lower court changes or -- or the jury decides that he's a Jones Act seaman, would have had to have covered him under the Jones Act. Professor Schoenbaum has said that the mutual exclusivity of the two acts is really in theory only and that there are always cases and will be dealing with the brown water seamen and brown water employees, harbor workers and longshoremen, where they're going to have to be covered under both anyway. Again, the First Circuit test, which does have an exception to it, which it clearly is -- is a snapshot, again to give someone another bite at the apple, which this Court thought, at least in the concurring opinion in Chandris, was a fair result, has that. But the test itself is -- is broad. It -- it is a bright line and it makes it clear, as this Court has stated in the past, that unless there's a transportation function, it's not a vessel in navigation. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Connelly. The case is submitted.
 We will now hear argument in the case of City against -- Sherrill, New York against the Oneida Indian Nation of New York. Mr. Sacks, whenever you're ready.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: With the Court's permission, the State of New York, as amicus, will address issues related to the Treaty of Buffalo Creek and I will address the other reasons why aboriginal title and other Indian possessory rights to the properties at issue were extinguished long before the Oneida Indian Nation purchased the properties in 1997 and 1998. The asserted basis for tax immunity in this case appears at page 1 of respondent's brief which is that the Oneidas have at all times held a tribal possessory right in the properties. But even if there was a tribal possessory right, aboriginal title or under the Treaty of Canandaigua, in 1805 and 1807 when these properties passed out of tribal hands, the passage of 190 years has extinguished that right. For 190 years, these properties have been in private non-Indian hands, have been freely alienable, have been transferred to innumerable innocent purchasers and have been subject to the full panoply of state and local laws including taxation.
 Well, is it your position that whenever an Indian transfers land in violation of the Nonintercourse Act, that that's a valid transfer? And if not, why is this different?
 No. It is not our position that that would be a valid transfer if there was a violation of the Nonintercourse Act. The principal issue here is whether, after of the passage of 190 years, there remains a possessory right. If there was a violation of a Nonintercourse Act in 1805 and 1807, Justice Kennedy, we believe the Oneida Indian Nation has a -- under this Court's decision in Oneida II -- a federal common law damage suit against New York State or against the United States of America for failing to exercise its fiduciary duty. But after 190 years, in 1997, they did not have a possessory right to these properties. The possessory right we're talking about, aboriginal title or some other tribal possessory right, isn't just a concept. As this Court has defined aboriginal title of those possessory rights, it's a right to current possession. And under this Court's decisions in cases such as Felix versus Patrick and Yankton Sioux, and Williams and Mitchell and Santa Fe, all of which were cited in the dissent written by Justice Stevens, for the, for members of dissent in Oneida II, tribal possessory rights are barred by that passage of time, the change in the character of the land and the innumerable innocent purchasers.
 Why does not having a possessory right mean that the city could tax them, or the State?
 The basis for the tax immunity here is that this land does not have Indian country status. For this land to have Indian country status, it has to be, in our view, under this Court's Venetie decision, Federal set-asides and Federal superintendence. If you look at how the Oneida Indian nation got this land in 1997, it wasn't because of any set-aside by the Federal Government in 1794, even if there was, and I will get to that later.
 No, I'm just thinking, that suppose you have a reservation but the tribe doesn't have a possessory right because in the middle of the reservation, there is some kind of long-term lease or a sale to a house that's owned by somebody else who is not a member of the tribe. I would think -- am I right that the city or the county in which that reservation sits can't tax it anyway?
 Right. I absolutely agree with you.
 All right. So if you were to say the tribe does not have a possessory right, they can't go in and eject all the people who are living there and built houses over the last 192 years. That doesn't mean still that you could tax them.
 But your hypothetical, Your Honor, presupposed the existence of the reservation and presupposed a possessory right subject to lease. The possessory right here did not exist because the Oneida Indian nation had no rights with respect to the land at all in 1997. Those rights could not be enforced. And for the right not to be --
 Well, they couldn't be enforced against certain innocent purchasers but when the land is reacquired, then it seems to me we have to ask whether there was an extinction of aboriginal title and whether the reservation was at some point subsequently disestablished by federal act. And if we hold against you on the ground that there was no extinction of aboriginal title and there was no disestablishment of the reservation, then it seems to me that when they reacquire, we get to exactly the point that Justice Breyer raises and that is, once they reacquire the land, why does it become taxable? Why does its nontaxable status not simply reassert itself?
 I think that you have to look at the definition of Indian country. If you look at the definition of Indian country, it requires, with respect to the properties we're talking about, federal set-aside and federal superintendence.
 So you're saying if the original establishment of the reservation was simply a continuation, was literally a reservation from a transfer of land to the State of New York and that the Indian title was a purely aboriginal title, not a title conferred by a federal act creating a reservation, that it cannot be Indian country, is that correct?
 If I understand the question that you asked, Your Honor, if the title came from the State of New York, for example, in the --
 Let's assume the title is aboriginal. Nothing in an act of the United States says we're giving this land to the Indians, e.g., in the Kansas situation. It's simply aboriginal title and it was never extinguished. Are you saying that if that is the source of the title as opposed to a federal act saying we give this to you, that it cannot be Indian country?
 No, Your Honor.
 Okay.
 No. In a situation where there was continuing aboriginal title, similar to the Senecas in the State of New York where New York State did not terminate the aboriginal rights of the Senecas, there need not be congressional act, there need not be congressional or treaty action to establish the reservation.
 So this part of your argument depends on our accepting your position on the Treaty of Fort Schuyler as being a conveyance of all property and a later retrocession, is that correct?
 No, Your Honor
 Because otherwise, I don't see what extinguished the aboriginal title.
 What extinguished the aboriginal title with respect to this aspect of the argument, and then I will move on to the Treaty of Fort Schuyler and the Treaty of Canandaigua. What extinguished the aboriginal title is the passage of time and the fact that this land has been under state and local jurisdiction for 190 years and this Court observed, in Hagen and Rosebud Sioux, and I acknowledge it was in a different context, but this is important, that stable rules of jurisdiction and sovereignty are important in situations like this where what we're dealing with is very few -- 1 percent of the land in the City of Sherrill is owned by the tribe. The land is predominantly non-Indian. And as this Court observed in Hagen and Rosebud Sioux, a finding that the land now comes back into tribal jurisdiction, to paraphrase, seriously disrupts the justifiable expectations of the community and that's not just a hypothetical in this case.
 I know that, but I mean, then it seems to me if one thing that Oneida establishes is that the whole title doesn't just disappear if nothing else happens, simply because of the passage of time.
 I think what disappears, Your Honor
 Is what?
 -- is the right to possess.
 Now we agree with that or I'll hypothetically agree with that. They can't come in and eject people. But then I'm back to my first question, because I take it that the refusal in Oneida to the suggestion that they can't go, say, to Buffalo, New York, or wherever, or some town and throw everybody out of the house, that that, of course, does reflect the passage of time. But for a city or State to tax the land, that doesn't involve the same kind of interference with people's expectation of living in the houses that they bought, that throwing someone out of his house would involve.
 Here's what impacts the expectations. What impacts the expectations is the following. I'll give you an example that appears from the joint appendix on the Court of Appeals from pages 1263 to 1277. In the year 2000, the City of Oneida cited two Oneida Indian Nation businesses, a convenience store and a gas station, for 16 fire code violations. The tribe citing this Court's decision in Brendale said, we're not governed by the local fire code. We're governed by tribal jurisdiction. It's more than just the interference, the issue of taxation, the issue of sovereignty is whether a gas station is going to blow up or burn down --
 It is a matter, is it not, of whether the tribe now has sovereignty over this parcel of land? Is that's what's at the bottom of the question?
 I think in terms of the problems for the citizens of the City of Sherrill, taxation is part of it, and sovereignty is part of it, and they go hand in hand.
 If the tribe has sovereign -- sovereignty status with regard to this property, then presumably the city can't tax it. So we have to decide that, do we?
 Yes, you do, Your Honor.
 All right. Now what do we do with the Oneida II case decided in 1985?
 This, the position we're taking here is fully consistent with Oneida II. In Oneida II, this Court held that there was a violation of federal common law principally because of a violation of the Nonintercourse -- Indian Trade and Intercourse Act in 1795. This Court wasn't asked to deal with, at that time, with the Treaty of Fort Schuyler. It wasn't asked to deal with the Treaty of Buffalo Creek. It wasn't presented with evidence of the numerous authorized New York State treaties in 1840 through 1846 that diminished this reservation, that the State of New York will deal with -- with as amicus --
 Why not? Why not? Why not? I mean, is every decision we make up for review when the interested parties fail to cite the, what they now assert are the dispositive acts?
 No, Your Honor. I think that principles of stare decisis still govern and I think what, and this is consistent with the position that we have taken with respect to the passage of time extinguishing the possessory right, is what this Court for stare decisis purposes found in Oneida II was that there was a violation of federal common law with respect to a transfer that was very different than this transfer, without any examination of the Treaty of Buffalo Creek and without any examination of the Treaty of Fort Schuyler.
 But there wouldn't have been a violation of federal law if this were not Indian country, if this were not an Oneida reservation when the transfer occurred.
 Your Honor, that might or might not be correct, depending on how one views the scope of the Nonintercourse Act. But if one views the scope of the Nonintercourse Act to apply to Indian reservations, even state reservations, as the Second Circuit in Mohican Tribe has held, then the Treaty of Fort Schuyler could have terminated all aboriginal title; The Treaty of Fort Schuyler could have established a state reservation for the Oneidas; and the Nonintercourse Act of 1790, two years later, could have prohibited the sale of those lands even though it was a state reservation and under state jurisdiction.
 Is that the application of the Nonintercourse Act? I assume it applied only to federal act reservations.
 Well, this Court has not dealt with that issue and from our purposes --
 How does it read? What does it say?
 The Nonintercourse Act
 Well, I didn't mean to interrupt you.
 The Nonintercourse Act in effect at the time prohibited the purchase made -- prohibited the purchase of lands from Indians or Indian tribes, to paraphrase. And that would have, and what hasn't --
 Unless made by treaty or convention entered into pursuant to the Constitution.
 Yes. Yes , unless -- unless -- unless subject to federal approval.
 An idea of precisely what's at stake within the Oneida litigation, as I understand it, the counties and the municipalities, the City of Sherrill would not be left in the end having to pay; New York would.
 The City of Sherrill is not a party in the land claim litigation. The land claim litigation --
 Well, from the county's point of view, I'm asking who pays at the end of the line. And it seems, in the Oneida cases, it's the State. Is it different here? And what taxes are we talking about precisely?
 What we are talking about -- to answer the first portion of your question, Justice Ginsburg, I think ultimately the citizens of the State of New York pay but it is, the judgment would be against either the State of New York or the against the counties in the land claim. In this case --.
 What goes with the taxes? You've said that the other effect will be that whenever the Oneidas buy a piece of property that is within this former reservation, and of which only 1 percent is now owned by Indians, whenever they buy a piece of property, that property is taken off the tax rolls.
 Correct, Your Honor.
 Which, of course, makes it a lot easier for them to buy it because it's much less expensive for them to hold that land. What else happens? The --
 What else happens is that
 The town can't regulate.
 The town can't regulate it and if they are running a business on it, and we believe this is contrary to state law, but if they are running a business on it they're not collecting sales taxes.
 And I assume it also means that that land cannot be repurchased by non-Indians?
 The tribe has changed its position on that, I believe, in the course of the last 30 years but that is their current position. That it becomes subject to the Nonintercourse Act consistent with their position. With the Court's permission, I want to, I do want turn to the 1788 Treaty of Fort Schuyler and, time permitting, the 1794 Treaty of Canandiagua. Our position on the treaty of Fort Schuyler I think is very plain in our papers and I just want to highlight what's in the rest of the treaty after Article 1, which is a cessionable land. What's in the rest of the treaty is that New York reserved numerous rights even with respect to the reservation's land. New York had, among other things, the right to make and apply laws to the reservation, to enforce the treaty -- and I'm quoting from Article 4 -- in such manner as the State shall deem proper. New York had the right to enforce its criminal laws with respect to intruders on the reservation that New York granted to the Oneidas obtaining the assistance of the Oneidas to do so. New York, in the treaty, prohibited the Oneidas from selling the lands. New York, in the treaty, prohibited the Oneidas from certain length of leases and New York had the right to enact laws with respect to the leases that were permitted to enforce the leases. The other thing that one needs to look at in the context of the times, when looking at how would the Oneidas have understood this, the tribes of the Iroquois Confederacy, knew how to preserve their aboriginal title when they wanted to do so and the Oneidas didn't do that. In the 1797 Big Tree agreement with the Senecas which is published at 7 Statutes at Large, 601, the Senecas sold much of their lands through Robert Morris under the approval of the United States. In the agreement, the agreement provided that the reserved lands were, and I quote, "clearly and fully understood to remain the property of the Senecas in as full and ample matter as if these presents had not been executed." That is the way an Indian tribe understood preserving aboriginal title. That didn't happen in the Treaty of Fort Schuyler.
 You're a good lawyer that they hired, and the Oneidas may not have had as good a lawyer. I don't think this was done around the campfire, do you?
 I'm sure it was not, Your Honor. The other thing that one has to look at at the time is what New York State was doing. New York State entered into three similar treaties at the time. One with the Oneidas, one with the Cayuga and one with the Onondaga. Those three treaties all terminated aboriginal title in the first provision. The other three tribes of the Iroquois were not of concern.
 When you say terminated the title, you mean by the conveyance of all lands?
 Yes, they had the exact same language in Article 1. The structure of the treaties were identical. The other three tribes of the Iroquois were not of concern to New York State in 1788 because the Mohawks had mostly removed to Canada, the Tuscaroras had no land of their own and the Senecas were in the portion of New York State where Massachusetts had the preemption right. So if you look at what is happening back in 1788 and early 1789, New York State is setting up a State treaty with the Oneidas and keeping jurisdiction over those lands. Now, to go back to what you asked earlier, Justice Scalia, no question that if in that context, the Federal Government then passed a statute that says, as it may, the Oneidas can't sell this land without federal approval. That's a violation of the Nonintercourse Act, but it doesn't change the fundamental nature of the land as being under state jurisdiction, and has been under state jurisdiction since 1788.
 Was there ever any federal superintendence of the land?
 If you count an agent going on the land, there was an agent on the land, but what has happened with this land in terms of federal superintendence is that this land has been superintended, and supervised whether in tribal hands or otherwise, by the State of New York and local governments since 1788. There is a reference in our papers to a report, it was issued in connection with the New York State setting up their troopers to cover the reservations, and that report acknowledged that the United States Government appreciated the fact that the State of New York had been keeping peace on the reservations with their police and saw no reason to interfere with over 100 years -- and this was in the early 20th century -- of over 100 years of state police supervision.
 It isn't the FBI that keeps peace on other reservations, is it? Isn't it quite standard for state law enforcement to function?
 Sorry I see my light is on.
 Can he answer that?
 Yes, go ahead and answer the question.
 The level of -- yes, Your Honor. It is, the FBI doesn't do it, States often do it. They do it sometimes with the permission but this happened for 200 years.
 Thank you, Mr. Sacks. Ms. Halligan.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The State of New York was granted time to address the third question presented regarding the 1838 treaty which we believe requires reversal of the decision below because it disestablishes the Oneida reservation. Respondents claim that they can now exercise sovereignty over any plot of land they buy within a vast 300,000 acre tract in Central New York that has long been inhabited almost entirely --
 Is sovereignty something that the tribe can lose by inaction over a period of time?
 I believe that it is, Your Honor, for the reasons that are laid out in petitioner's brief, but regardless of what the Court decides about that question, the Treaty of 1838 clearly disestablishes the reservation, which terminates all sovereignty prospectively. The language in the historical context --
 The Buffal Creek --
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Treaty.
 Yes, the Treaty of Buffalo Creek. It makes clear both the language of the treaty itself as well as its historical context that it was intended to terminate Oneida sovereignty in New York State.
 What you seem to be asking is to infer from that treaty that the prior unlawful land sales of the Oneida's New York reservation were somehow ratified.
 No, Your Honor, ratification is not presented squarely in this case. The only question that's at issue in this case is whether or not, regardless of whether the transactions that took place between 1795 and 1838 were legal or illegal, and we've argued that they're legal in other cases --
 But if you're right about Buffalo Creek, it would mean that the effect of the Government's decision to repossess something in Kansas was to leave the Oneidas without any land.
 Well, at that point the Oneidas --
 It certainly wasn't that clear from it. It appeared to be the assumption that the Oneidas did not have to go to Kansas, if they chose not to do it. It was dependent on making suitable arrangements.
 With regard to the 5,000 acres that they occupied as of 1838, one could read Ransom Gillett's assurances to the Oneidas as allowing them to continue to retain occupancy over that narrow slice of land, but what that cannot do is change the language of the treaty which makes clear that the reservation is otherwise entirely disestablished. And if I can refer to some of the language of the treaty itself, first of all, the treaty explicitly states that its purpose was to carry out the Government's policy in removing the Indians from the east to the west of the Mississippi. That simply cannot be squared with ongoing sovereignty over the remaining 295,000 acres which they now claim --
 Sure it can. I mean, one way to pursue that policy is to offer them lands in the west if they want to go there. That would certainly pursue the Government's policy of removing them.
 This Court held that in New York Indians that Article 13 of the treaty which provides that the Oneidas agree to remove was sufficient to effect a present grant of the Kansas lands and to avoid any forfeiture. So it was much more than an agreement to agree or an offer, if you will. But --
 So you're saying there is no consideration. If, they simply agree to remove if they -- if they want to remove.
 No, they did receive, they did receive consideration and the Court made sure that that was --
 No, they gave none, I'm talking about.
 Who gave none, Your Honor?
 The Indians. You're saying they gave no promise in exchange, if they simply promised to remove if they felt like it.
 No, Your Honor; I'm saying that --.
 I'm trying to help you here. [Laughter.]
 Well, then in that case, I suppose I should agree. My apologies. But what they did was to agree to remove, and in fact, that's what happened. If you look at what transpired immediately following the treaty, by 1846, all but 350 acres, down from 5,000, have been sold by the Oneidas and very few remain. By 1920, there are only 32 acres. And the U.S.'s activities in the area also confirm that that was the understanding of the treaty, that it terminated sovereignty. There are some very sparse references in the records to some exercise of jurisdiction by the U.S. starting around the turn of the century, around the early 1900s, but those only relate to the 32 acres that remained occupied by the Oneidas. There is no indication of any exercise of U.S. jurisdiction over the remaining 295,000 acres.
 I thought that perhaps the Treaty of Buffalo Creek is thinking of 50,000 acres where these particular Indian tribe members had their homes, or at least arguably. Just no one was thinking about the remaining 300,000 because they had long left those. It had nothing to do with them.
 I believe the text and the historical background suggests otherwise, Your Honor. Article 4 of the treaty says that the Kansas lands will be the new homes of the Oneidas and it also explains where the Oneidas can exercise sovereignty. It says that it will secure to the Oneidas in the Kansas lands, in said country, which refers to the Kansas lands, the right to establish their own form of government, to appoint their own officers and to administer their own laws. That means that sovereignty is to be in Kansas, not to be in New York.
 Well, It means that that's what was intended but what do you make of all of the testimony about the representations made by -- I forget the man's name
 Gillett.
 -- the government's representative, to the effect you don't have to leave New York.
 That related only to the 5,000 acres that they occupied at that time. The record isn't very clear about why he made that assurance.
 No, but my, I guess, let me just get to the point and you can answer that.
 Yes Your Honor, sorry.
 Doesn't that negate your argument that the treaty as such disestablished the reservation?
 No, Your Honor, it doesn't. The treaty on its terms appears to disestablish the reservation entirely. Gillett's statement could perhaps be read as a subsequent gloss on that treaty to assure the Indians that they won't be forced off their land, the 5,000 acres that they continue to occupy, perhaps because since New York was not a party to the treaty, there couldn't be any explicit session language in the treaty. New York was the only entity that had a right to buy that remaining 5,000 acres because it held the right of preemption. So it may have been that the Oneidas wanted to ensure that they could reach reasonable terms. And they did. They sold almost all of that land within the following six years after proclamation of the treaty. So the contemporaneous history squares with that. It's very similar to what happened in Santa Fe, in which this Court said there was a reservation that was created for the Santa Fes, there was some indication of acceptance of that reservation, and that acceptance was sufficient to terminate the tribe's sovereignty over any lands outside of the reservation that was provided to them, even though many of them did not in fact remove to that land. Here the Oneidas received much more. Not only did many of them sell the lands and leave immediately but they received the benefit of their bargain by recovering compensation for the Kansas lands from this Court in New York Indians.
 What is the precise language that you think relinquished, changed the sovereignty that -- changed the sovereignty?
 I think there are several provisions, Your Honor. First of all, in the recitals, it states that the purpose of the treaty is to carry out the Government's policy in removing the Indians from the east to the west of the Mississippi. Article 2 also notes that the Kansas lands will be a permanent home for all Indians now residing in the State of New York as well as elsewhere, and Article 4 states that there will be an exercise of sovereignty. It says specifically that will they will be able to establish their own form of government, appoint their officers and administer their laws in the Kansas land specifically. So I think those are the strongest provisions. I would also like to touch for a moment if I can on a question that several members of the Court have raised which is what is the impact of this decision here. From the perspective of the State of New York and the localities, it's very serious because it does concern whether or not the tribe can unilaterally regain sovereignty over a very large tract of land in central New York. This is an area that has been --
 Well, there are implications from Oneida II case that the Indians can reacquire land and assert some kind of possessory right.
 With regard to a narrower swath of land than what's at issue here. And in any event, the Court expressly did not pronounce on the effect of the Buffalo Creek treaty here. If that's the case, what could well result is a patchwork quilt of jurisdiction which this Court has said poses tremendous governance problems. It's governance by tract book. This is not just hypothetical. There are already difficulties that have started to arise as a result of the Second Circuit's decision. For example, another tribe relying on the decision here purchased land within its original land claim area that's just 300 yards from a local high school and have begun operation of a gaming hall there. The locality attempted to enjoin operation of the gaming hall, but was unable to do so in light of the Second Circuit's decision below. We anticipate there are will be many other problems of that sort that will arise. The residents of the area here have long settled and justifiable expectations. The settlement patterns are clear here. The absence of any exercise of U.S. jurisdiction outside a very small plot of land is not controverted. These are factors that this Court has repeatedly held in cases like Hagen and Yankton Sioux are relevant to the question of both what the contemporaneous understanding of the treaty was and what the result should be today, and we submit that they should lead to the same result here as well. If there are no further questions --
 Thank you, Ms. Halligan. Mr. Smith, we'll hear from you, please.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: There was a suggestion in answer to an earlier question that the Oneidas have changed their position about whether the land is alienable when in their hands. That's not correct. There is nothing in the record to suggest that. What the record does suggest at page 213 of the joint appendix is that Sherrill has changed its position. It wanted an easement on Oneida land in 1997 and at that page of the appendix, you will see that Sherrill went to the Department of the Interior for Federal approval of the easement under Federal law, understanding at the time the Oneida's position and the Federal law principle that the land wasn't subject even to an easement absent the Secretary's approval.
 So you're saying your position was and is that it's not inalienable without the approval of the feds?
 Yes. And the land, when the Oneida's possession of the land, actual possession is unified with their underlying Federal property and treaty rights, the land is inalienable and cannot be sold today out of the Oneida's possession any more than it could 200 years ago.
 But it, the portion within the reservation you claim is alienable so long as it's not owned by an Oneida. The current owners can sell it to somebody else, right?
 Your Honor, the point of Oneida II -- the answer is yes. The answer is yes.
 Yes or -- Does that strike you as strange?
 No, Your Honor. It's, there is an unusual twist to it, and it arises from the fact that there were illegal transfers 200 years ago. There was a suggestion in the Oneida II decision and it has been followed by the lower Federal courts that there may be equitable principles that constrain remedies in a course of order to be entered in a land claim action brought by a tribe that is out of possession, but the equitable principles that are at stake here are very different and they don't involve the same --
 Well, if you prevail in this case, then could suits be brought by the tribe to evict current owners of land on the historical Oneida 300,000-acre reservation?
 No, Justice O'Connor. The Courts have ruled that we may not do that and it is the position and I will say it clearly here today that the Oneidas do not assert a right to evict landowners in the land claim area. Judge McKern who handled --
 But if it's owned by the State of New York, if it's been acquired somehow by the State, then what?
 We are not asserting a right to evict. We are not waiving any of the underlying rights that involve right to possession under Federal law and aboriginal rights and the point I'm making should not be construed that way. What I'm saying is that we are not asking a Court and do not expect a Court to evict anyone from action -- from land that is not in our actual possession.
 What happens about -- suppose -- I just want to follow this. You don't evict the people who are there but it's 22 square miles in the center of New York State. That's a lot of land. And maybe that's worth a trillion dollars, I don't know. So does that mean that the Indian tribe would have -- would it mean that it had the right to, let's say, hundreds of billions of dollars, the value of that property, that it could sue someone for it, the State of New York or the Federal Government? I guess the State of New York?
 Let me give you a concrete answer. The key to the land claim is approximately one quarter the size of the Oneida land claim and it has gone to judgment and is on appeal in the Second Circuit. The judgment in that case after adjustments for interest and so on was $250 million and it was rendered against the State of New York only as the initial and continuing --
 What was the acreage there?
 Approximately one fourth -- the answer is 64,000 acres.
 Well, that may not be worth as much. Maybe this includes several cities and towns? What do you think it is? I mean in other words, the answer to my question is in principle, yes. In principle, if the Indian tribe owns 22 square miles, even if they can't get possession, they're entitled to the value of it, in your opinion?
 Correct. The point of Oneida II is that a damages remedy is appropriate as to a tribe out of possession, but there is no suggestion that that is a judicial sale of the underlying federally protected treaty rights --
 No, no, of course the people who are there have it, but maybe it's not Buffalo. I don't know, maybe it's all of Buffalo, New York, or maybe it's a town. I'm not saying that that's the law but I just wanted your view of that. And then I wanted to know this, that on the legal part, I would like your response to the -- I take it your answer is yes, they're entitled to the value of it. I'm right about that, that is your answer?
 Yes, Your Honor. Well, they're entitled to two items of value. They're entitled to retrospective damages for trespass, and in that the Court has not --
 On the whole 300,000?
 Well, there is one parcel part of it that we have not sued upon because there was a 1798 Federal treaty that validated the transfer. The State, which feels that it was not bound by the Nonintercourse Act, twice went to the Federal Government for formal Federal treaty approval of these transactions. One of them went through. That was 1798. The other one was 1802. The President did not proclaim it and the State never went back to the Federal Government.
 Do the, would the Oneidas have a claim to tax the current property owners?
 No, sir.
 Why not?
 The decisions of the Court in cases like Atkinson and Montana address the lack of power of a tribe with respect to non-Indian fee lands within a reservation. I recognize that there is an added wrinkle here in that the Oneida's rights persist in that land, even though it is out of their possession and that wouldn't have the same -- that wouldn't have been true in Atkinson and Montana, but in that the Courts have held that the possession of the non-Indians is lawful in the sense that it will not be interrupted and the land title can be passed in subsequent transfers, we accept the proposition that Montana and Atkinson would prevent the Oneidas from regulating in any respect, let alone taxing, any of the land in the possession of non-Indians.
 Mr. Smith, isn't there any principle of laches that comes into effect here? I mean, really what you're asking the Court to do is to sanction a very odd checkerboard system of jurisdiction in the middle of New York State. Some parcels, the ones the Indians choose to buy and are able to buy, become Indian territory and everything else is governed by New York State. This is just a terrible situation as far as governance is concerned and part of the blame for the situation we're in is that the Oneidas did not complain about this for 170 years.
 The issues of laches in time is not within the questions presented in this case, notwithstanding that it has been identified in earlier decisions and was actually raised by the counties in this Court the last go-around. Laches does not bar this claim. These were illegal transactions declared by Federal statute to be of no validity in law or equity. The Oneida II decision which holds that background principles of Federal law which would ordinarily incorporate state statutes of limitation don't apply because their intention with the underlying rule that only Congress can impair or extinguish this right. Those same --
 The case also held that because of the passage of time and the reliance interests that have developed, we are not going to give you possession. Now, why doesn't the same principle apply to giving you jurisdiction? Because of the passage of time, you can get damages for trespass. Maybe even you can get the value of the land. But it would just create a chaotic situation if we say that you have jurisdiction in the middle of New York State over any pieces of land that you can buy.
 The equitable principles that would inform remedy in an action brought by a tribe out of possession don't apply when the tribe is in possession or else there has been a judicial extinguishment of an underlying right that's only within the power of Congress to extinguish. The Court has been clear that the treaty right here -- we have a Federal treaty and it says you have the free use and enjoyment of the land. In the New York Indians I, the Court said that means similar, the same promise made to the Senecas means that the land cannot be taxed. The argument has been made that the Oneida's only rights are to be paid off now, to be in effect have the un-extinguished Federal aboriginal right and the un-extinguished treaty right purchased. Those rights through literally 200 years of decisions are within the sole control of Congress. Oneida II made pains to say that this was an unusual situation fraught with some tension and problems, but those problems were for Congress. There are a dozen cases from this Court that deal --
 Excuse me, Mr. Smith, first, would you clarify how much land is now claimed as Indian -- within the tribe's aboriginal right? It's not -- well, for one thing clarify while you are not claiming the entire 6 million. Didn't they have 6 million acres to start with?
 They did. The matter was litigated in the Second Circuit and resolved adversely to the Oneidas, but I would take the position that the Treaty of Canandaigua actually confirms the transfer of land outside of the retained reservation, so that the land that we are talking about today as retaining the Oneida's rights is I think approximately 270,000 acres.
 But some of that you said was taken out by an approved transfer in 1798?
 Yes, and that's why I'm not saying 300,000 acres. I can't do the arithmetic and I don't have the final survey --
 But something around 275?
 Around 270.
 And the figure, the 250 million is for the rental -- what is that -- what is that for?
 In the Cayuga case, there were two elements of damages. One was retrospective, and that was rental damages for past trespass. The other was a current value, because Judge McKern said that he would not evict anyone, and that he thought a suitable alternative to eviction was the award of value, because it would put the tribe in a position through a free-market and voluntary relationship with purchasers to, quote, "restore its homeland." Judge McKern got really to the heart of this process by recognizing that there are inequities all around, if you will, and that the Court is without the power to extinguish the underlying rights. It's Congress's role, but that there needs to be a sensible way of recognizing those rights today. And what Judge McKern decided is that damages would put the tribe in a position to do what the Oneidas have done with respect to the land that's at issue here before the Court, and that's to make, you know, a fair-and-square deal and pay full value.
 Which New York State paid, and that's the end of it.
 Yes, Your Honor. If I understand your question, the answer is yes.
 That's not the end of it. From what you're saying, I gather that you believe, in that case, once they purchase the land, it becomes tribal.
 Correct. I mean that's the end of that litigation. There is a judgment, it's gone to the Court of Appeals, and it's there now. The issue of damages remedies when the tribe is out of possession is simply conceptually and fundamentally different than the question of what happens when the tribe has joined possession --
 What do you say on the merits, then, to the claim that there were 300,000 of these acres in 1838 or with the Treaty of Buffalo Creek -- there were 300,000 acres that nobody was paying any attention to because there were no tribe members that lived there, so that when you have language in the treaty, under those circumstances, that says their home is now -- where was it? Illinois or --
 Kansas.
 Kansas. Their home is now in Kansas. That's the nation. That's the place. And that -- you've heard the language cited. And even though a person says, "You can live here as long as you want," that just means they can live there as long as they want; that doesn't mean it's the reservation. The reservation's sovereignty may have gone to Kansas, though, of course, nobody had to move, unless he struck a fair bargain that he agreed to with the State of New York. I take it that's their argument. I just want to hear your response.
 There are a lot of parts to that. Let me respond to what I think is the most fundamental.
 Yes.
 That argument rests on the idea that there was an assumption, at the time of the Treaty of Buffalo Creek, that the prior transfers were valid. It's an argument of ratification by assumption. Oneida II says, in a much more forceful circumstance, that even a later Federal treaty that explicitly refers to the prior session does not ratify it, because the ratifying language has to be clear and express, and you have to believe that both the Indians and the Congress, the United States, meant to do that. Here, the -- if you think about it, in what I just heard concerning Buffalo Creek, there's an interesting asymmetry. We're supposed to assume that the treaty covered all the land, but we're not supposed to conclude that Ransom Gillet's promises covered it all. We're supposed to believe that one, by assumption, extends to the entire reservation and that the other, forceful promises of a Federal treaty commissioner that you need not go anywhere, are actually very limited and carried with them a thought that they were extinguishing rights in other land. That interaction with Ransom Gillet is crucial. The treaty --
 Would it not be odd to have a -- to give assurance that you could buy back what you've lost? Does it -- would that -- that's a very strange construction of the representations attendant upon Buffalo Creek. I understand what you're talking about with the 5,000 acres.
 The representations from the Federal treaty commissioner were not that they could buy it back. The Federal treaty commissioner went to the Oneidas because they would not agree to the treaty. They didn't want to give up their rights. He gave them a piece of paper that was meant to assure them they were not giving up their rights. There was no suggestion in this important interaction that they were bargaining over the loss of other rights. Mille Lacs is directly in point here. Mille Lacs, I think -- well, from Mille Lacs, you can derive the proposition that where the record shows no bargaining over a right, and where the treaty does not refer to the right, the Indians will not be held to have silently yielded their important rights. In the nature of this interaction, you have the suggestion that -- you have a far more important right, in much larger part of the reservation, that persisted as a matter of Federal law. There is nothing about what happened at Buffalo Creek that would suggest that anyone would think they were affecting the Oneida's rights in lands that were not involved in the treaty. Now, the treaty --
 Mr. Stewart, your time is beginning to come up, and there is one thing we haven't talked about that I would really like to get your view on, and that is the 1788 Treaty -- what was that, Fort Schuyler -- Treaty of Fort Schuyler?
 Yes.
 -- between New York State and the Oneidas. Now, that contained language which said the Oneidas cede and grant all their lands to the people of the State of New York. That was the operative provision. Later on, it -- Article 2 says, "Of the ceded lands" -- the ceded lands, lands that have been ceded -- "a tract described by metes and bounds is reserved to the Oneidas to hold to themselves and their posterity forever." Now, I would normally interpret that to mean that the Oneidas gave up all of their sovereignty over the lands and were given back, by the State of New York, the right over this tract designated by metes and bounds. Now, I'm saying I would normally interpret that, except in a treaty with the Indians. In a treaty with the Indians, you say, "Well" -- and we have cases which have language somewhat like this, and they say, "Well, they really didn't cede the part that they reserved." That may be the case in -- ordinarily. But it seems to me, a basic principle of contract law -- of treaty law, of any law -- that where there is an ambiguous phrase or provision, you interpret it the way the parties themselves have interpreted it. And it seems to me that the subsequent history, after 1788, indicates that the Oneidas believed that New York State had jurisdiction over that land.
 Actually --
 The New York State police were in there. New York State managed the lands.
 Justice Scalia, actually, it's interesting. In the Joint Appendix in the Court of Appeals, at page 413, is the actual document that governed the transfer of this land, the state statute; and in that statute, the State granted its right of preemption to an individual to acquire the land, because it understood that it had not yet exercised its right of preemption. That's, in the conduct of the parties, a direct refutation of the idea that the right of preemption was exercised in the Treaty of Buffalo -- in the Treaty of Fort Schuyler, the 1788 treaty. The most fundamental point, though, about the 1788 treaty is that next came the 1794 Treaty of Canandaigua, which embodied a Federal promise to protect the free use and enjoyment of this land, and the Oneidas' possession of it. And that exact promise -- not sort of, like, but exact -- was held in New York Indians I to prevent taxation of the Senecas' lands. Now, I guess I'd like to make two quick points before I'm out of time. One is that, with respect to the idea that it's just too late, apart from the fact that the question is not presented, I want to emphasize that, in section 2415 of Title 28, Congress explicitly focused on the question of these old claims. And if you read the legislative history, all they talked about was how to deal with the Oneida claim and these old claims. And they not only provided that title claims are not barred by statute of limitations, and established a limitations period that would not have run against the Oneidas because they were on a Federal list, but they did the following, which I think is notable. The statute provides that these claims accrued, in 1966, on the day of the statute, there is no room for background equitable principles in Federal law. Where Congress has specifically focused on a problem, addressed it, the idea is, I suppose, that there is no room to fill gaps here by the Court where Congress has decided just what the gaps are and how to fill them. The other point that I would make concerns the Treaty of Buffalo Creek. The treaty's language leaves it to both sides to decide whether or not Indians are going to Kansas. The legislate -- the history of the treaty shows that the United States backed away from any language which would oblige it to remove Indians, and the language with respect to the Indians left them a choice. But, ultimately, all of that is controlled by what happened. The Federal Government made a decision that no Indians would go to Kansas. The idea that Buffalo Creek extinguished reservations in New York would seem bizarre to anyone in New York today, because the Onondagas have reservations, the Senecas have reservations, the St. Regis have reservations, the Tonawandas have reservations, the Tuscaroras have reservations, and the Oneidas have reservations. It didn't extinguish just the -- there's an idea that you can look at this in a vacuum -- it didn't just extinguish the Oneida reservations. Under the Santa Fe rationale, the point is not that Congress ultimately intended two reservations, although it has done that often -- the Choctaw, the Mississippi Choctaw, the Seminoles. It frequently happened with removal, that there were more than one reservations. But here, you would have to believe that Congress intended no reservation. You would have to believe that Congress quickly came to the decision that none of these Indian tribes in New York actually had a reservation anywhere, and that's not acceptable. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Smith. Mr. Stewart?
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: I would like to address, first, the City's argument that the long passage of time renders it improper to give the tribe a tax exemption on lands that have recently been purchased. That argument is wrong for three reasons. First, if we are correct that the tribe had federally protected title as of the 1790s and that that Federal protection was never validly extinguished, then the fact that the tribe was out of possession of the relevant lands for nearly two centuries is, itself, a distinct and substantial legal wrong, and it would be adding insult to injury to say that precisely because the tribe had suffered that initial injury, it should be disentitled to take advantage of a tax exemption that would otherwise flow from its possession of --
 I don't -- I don't understand that argument at all. I mean, it's just a general rule that, where you've been wronged, you have to come forward, in a timely fashion, to get the wrong righted. And what difference does it make what the nature of the wrong is, whether it's dispossession or not?
 Well, I think it -- I think it's important to distinguish between two different types of delay. What was at issue in Oneida I and Oneida II was delay in bringing the underlying lawsuit. And, even in that context, the Court said that the suit was not barred entirely, but equitable factors might be taken into account in formulating an appropriate remedy. Here, we don't have delay in filing a lawsuit. That is, nobody doubts that the tribes asserted their right to a tax exemption promptly after repurchasing the relevant lands. The argument on the other side is that their delay in purchasing the land should be analogized to --
 Well, do you say that a tribe can never lose its sovereign rights to land? Can it acquiesce in the loss of those rights?
 This Court has held that the tribe -- that a tribe may abandon aboriginal title to land.
 Yes.
 It's not --
 Yes, and we have held that a State can abandon sovereignty, as in Massachusetts versus New York.
 But the Court has also held that once Congress creates a reservation, once it confers explicit federal protection on particular lands, the reservation can be diminished or disestablished only by act of Congress; it can't be terminated through adverse possession. And with respect to the question of whether delay in buying the land should be analogized to delay in bringing a --
 Well, that might give them a right to some kind of damages for a violation, but what does that do to the sovereign claims of the tribe?
 I think the -- the reservation would remain a reservation. As Mr. Smith pointed out, with respect to parcels within the reservation that are not owned by Indians, the tribe's regulatory authority is extremely limited and, therefore, the tribe would not be able to exercise anything like plenary regulatory jurisdiction over the whole 270,000 acres.
 What is it? You said "extremely limited." This is the first that I heard that the tribe might have some authority over part of that, what, the 275- -- the 275,000 acres, even though it hadn't repurchased the parcels.
 The Court, in Atkinson Trading and in Montana versus United States, before that, had said that the tribe may be able to regulate conduct on non-Indian lands to the extent that the conduct involves voluntary transactions with the tribe or its members or to the extent that the regulation is necessary in order to protect the tribe's sovereign over the land that it possesses is --
 But now we're talking about land that -- where there are no tribe members, as I understand it, in this area is predominantly non-tribal members.
 I agree. In -- and Atkinson Trading makes clear that, even when the great bulk of the land is owned by the tribe or its members, the tribe's ability to regulate conduct on the non-Indian parcels is sharply limited. That would be doubly true in a tract of this nature. But to return to the point about the State's reliance interest, I think it's -- or the city's reliance interest -- I think it's important to stress that this case is only about taxation, and a municipality can't claim to have the same sort of reliance interest in being able to tax that a potential defendant in a --
 Well, that may be true, but that's why I wondered about the damage part of it. That is, I'm still thinking that a trespass action for trespasses that occurred in 1850 or 1700 is worth millions today, even if it's tiny, because of the interest, passage of time, et cetera. When you add that to the value of the land, I'm thinking of numbers that are astronomical. And yet that hasn't happened. And so, what actually, as a -- and that's why I'm thinking, isn't a damage action far more serious than simply taking property off the tax rolls?
 That's true, but --
 And that's why I want to know how, in practice, this works out. Does Congress have the power, for example, to deal with it? Is what we're considering in this case simply a negotiating position and strengthening people's hands, vis a vis legislation? What's going on?
 Congress does have the power to deal with it. And at the end of the Court's opinion in Oneida II, the Court expressed confidence that, up to this point, has not been borne out, that Congress would fix the problem.
 Yes, Congress has done nothing about this, has it? Can -- has the tribe asked, administratively, for the Bureau of Indians Affairs to recognize it now as a tribe?
 Well, the Bureau of Indian Affairs has recognized the tribe all along. That is, under the Treaty of Canandaigua, the Federal Government was required to pay annuities and treaty cloth to the Six Nations, and the Federal Government has done that continuously since the beginning. So we've always recognized this to be a tribe. And I think you're -- you've put your finger on an important point, Justice Breyer, in that the Court, in Oneida II, said that it hoped that Congress would fix the problem, and thought that it would, but said even if Congress doesn't legislate a solution, the suit can go forward. The Court contemplated that equitable considerations could be taken into account in formulating a remedy, but it certainly didn't contemplate that the tribe, at the end of the day, would be left without any remedy at all. And, as you point out, if the tribe can sue for damages, it seems farfetched to think that it wouldn't be able to reassert the tax immunity that --
 What tax -- what taxes are we talking about? In addition to property tax, are we also talking about sales tax?
 No, the Court has said -- the Court has said, as a general matter, as a matter of Federal law, a tribal merchant on tribal land can be required to collect sales taxes from non-Indians, at least for the purchase of goods that were manufactured off the reservation.
 Well, it isn't just taxes we're talking about. It's jurisdiction over these parcels of land. It -- I mean, taxes -- that's just one aspect of saying that this land no longer belongs to New York State.
 I mean, taxes are at issue -- are the only thing that's at issue in this case. But I agree that holding this parcel to be a reservation would have implications for regulatory jurisdiction, as well. Now, there isn't a categorical rule of Federal law that says that States and localities absolutely cannot regulate conduct on tribal lands within the reservation. Rather, there is a preemption test -- there's certainly a thumb on the scale in favor of an exemption from state and local regulation where tribal reservation lands are involved.
 Mr. Stuart, I have one question about Buffalo Creek. If we hold that Buffalo Creek didn't disestablish the reservation, then doesn't the New York Indian case rest on a false premise because that case gave $2 million for failure to give the Kansas lands?
 Well, the Court, in the New York Indians II, recognized, to start with, that the treaty effected an immediate session of the Oneida's Wisconsin lands to the Federal Government, and the Court specifically noted that that cession, in and of itself, would be sufficient consideration to support a contract between private parties. So it simply isn't correct to say that the New York Oneidas gave up nothing other than a promise to remove. The second --
 Was there any positive indication -- I just don't remember this -- in the New York case, that they would -- that they, in fact, had ceded anything of New -- of their interests in New York? As distinct from the Wisconsin lands?
 I mean, there were references to the primary inducement to the Federal Government's entering into the treaty being the desire to --
 That's entering into the treaty. But when it came to compensation, was there an indication that they were being compensated for anything other than Kansas land, which they had obtained as a result of ceding their Wisconsin land?
 No. No.
 Okay.
 The compensation was strictly for the Kansas lands that were denied to them. And it's important to note that the Senecas --
 But there was no indication that they got Kansas for anything other than Wisconsin, is that correct?
 They got -- I mean, they didn't -- they weren't held to have promised -- made a commitment to remove from New York. Now, clearly, in analyzing the reasons --
 But there was no indication that they had ceded anything with respect to title in New York, was there?
 That's correct.
 Okay,
 Well, did it rest upon the cession in Wisconsin?
 It rested, in part, upon the cession in Wisconsin. It rested, in part, on a fairly technical argument, to the effect that the grant of Kansas lands was one en presente. That is, it was a present grant of Kansas lands, and, therefore, the New York Indians could be disentitled to those lands only if they had -- a forfeiture had been established. And the Court looked to Article 3 of the treaty to determine the conditions for forfeiture. It said that the Federal Government would have been required to allege a forfeiture by legislative or judicial act, et cetera. The other thing I really wanted to -- the point I wanted to make about the reliance interest of the taxing jurisdiction are that no matter how long a particular tract has been taxable, it is -- may I finish this? -- it is always within the realm of a city's contemplation that it may be bought up tomorrow by the Federal Government, a church, any other tax-exempt entity, and, consequently, the municipality can have no sense of repose that it will remain taxable. Thank you.
 Thank you, Mr. Stewart. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument in the case of Smith against Massachusetts. Mr. Nathanson.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The trial judge found Melvin Smith not guilty on the merits and unequivocally so. That acquittal entitled Melvin Smith to repose. Instead, what he got was a moving target. The trial judge's later reconsideration of Smith's acquittal placed him in jeopardy for that same offense twice. Smith's position on the matter is completely faithful to this Court's precedent, and it makes sense in the real-world practice of criminal law. The State, on the other hand, asks this Court to make exceptions to the rule, long-held, that acquittals terminate jeopardy.
 No. Just to say that this -- what happened here was not a final determination. Take an analog -- an analogy to rule 54(b). The judge can say, yes, I've made this ruling and it sticks. You see, I'm going to give you a separate piece of paper that says judgment, but if I don't give you that separate piece of paper, even though I said judgment granted, it doesn't count until the very end of the case. I can always change my mind. Why shouldn't it operate the same way on the criminal side?
 Well, first of all, obviously, that's a civil case. The Double Jeopardy Clause doesn't apply to civil cases. Second of all -- except with some rare exceptions. What I think the best way to -- to really define finality here -- and -- and whatever finality is, I really do think we -- we do have it here because this Court has said an acquittal under Martin Linen, a resolution, correct or not, of some or all if the factual elements --
 Yes, but I looked at Martin Linen, and there, there was something labeled judgment of acquittal entered. Here we have an endorsement on a motion, and then we have an entry by the clerk saying -- what does the entry say? Motion granted or something like that.
 Allowed, and it was attested by the clerk.
 Yes. But is there -- this might be significant. Is there in Massachusetts, when a motion for acquittal is granted and there are other charges still going on, is there a piece of paper that says, judgment, acquitted on count whatever it was?
 No, Your Honor. The -- the formal rule, which is not always observed, but the formal rule is that it must be recorded on -- on the docket and announced in an open courtroom. That happened here.
 Well, suppose you have a State and the State has a statute, and the statute says any motion for acquittal may be granted by the -- the trial court at the close of the prosecution's evidence, but that motion shall not be deemed final and may be reviewed by the district court at any time before -- or by the trial court at any time before the submission of the case to the jury. Then there's no repose element because the -- the defendant is on notice that this may not be final. What would be the -- your position in that case if a statute like that were on the books? And if you say that that's different, then I'll say, well, suppose the supreme court of Massachusetts just makes up this rule as a judicial matter.
 Well, to answer the first question, I think that if -- if such a statute were enacted, I'm willing to grant, for purposes of this case, that it wouldn't be a double jeopardy problem. It may in a later case -- and you know, I'd be very interested in that -- a problem under a combination of Jackson and Winship because the defendant may have a -- a right to that determination.
 Okay, well, let -- let's just assume that you've conceded that. Now, you've been guarded about it. If we can do that by statute, why can't we do that by a judicial decision by the supreme court of -- Judicial Court of Massachusetts?
 Well, first of all, the Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts is the one who promulgated the rules in this case. Rule 25(a) is promulgated by the Supreme Judicial Court of --
 Well, but they put a gloss on the rule by their decision.
 Well, that was the Massachusetts Appeals Court, I might add. Second of all, the rule itself requires that the motion shall be ruled upon at that time. It says nothing about reconsideration, and clearly --
 They've held that in this case. We have a Massachusetts decision. It's their law and under their law in Massachusetts, the judge can revise it.
 Actually --
 Well, if it isn't their law, then I don't know how -- why they affirmed this conviction rather than reversing it.
 I'm not sure I know either, Your Honor.
 All right, but I mean, I -- I take it that it is their law, otherwise I'd see reversal, wouldn't I, and not affirmance?
 Actually I think what they did --
 What?
 -- Your Honor, is they assumed that there was an error in -- in -- when dealing strictly with the rule, at the -- at the end of the section dealing with this, they assume that there was an error and said no prejudice, which I've contended in the brief --
 So -- so in other words, they're saying that in this case -- how could there not be prejudice? He had another trial. I mean -- how could -- I don't understand this from beginning to end then. But let me go back to my original question. What rule do you propose?
 As for finality, the rule I propose is, first of all, we have to start with the basic foundation, which is an acquittal, under Martin Linen with a resolution --
 What I'm saying is, for double jeopardy purposes --
 Yes.
 -- an acquittal in your view is an acquittal for double jeopardy purposes when?
 There's -- there's three things that I think Court should look at. One, first of all, because we treat acquittals from the bench for double jeopardy purposes the same as acquittals from a jury, a prosecutor can poll a jury immediately after the verdict. A prosecutor clearly --
 No. I'm asking you for a -- I'd have to write -- if I agreed with you, I'd have to say we have here a judge who changed his mind. Under the clause of the Constitution, a judge cannot change his mind when. Now, go ahead. Now, fill in the blanks.
 Yes.
 According -- I know what their rule is. Their rule is a judge can change his mind up to the point that the jury is dismissed, something like that. I understand that. Now, I want to know what your rule -- is your rule a judge cannot change his mind once he writes the word acquittal on a piece of paper, even if he says, oh my God, I meant to say no acquittal? Too late. Too late. Okay, now, so I want to know what your rule is. Is that the rule?
 No, Your Honor.
 Okay. What is the rule?
 The -- your first question -- the constitutional point of no return, shall we say, is further proceedings. If there is an acquittal and there are further proceedings --
 There is no further proceeding if he writes the word acquittal, I guess until he changes his mind. So 3 minutes later, he says I change my mind. Now there are further proceedings.
 Well, then at that point you look to other indicia of finality that this -- this Court referenced that in -- in Vincent, and that -- that's generally compliance with State procedure. Compliance with State procedures --
 I need to write a simple rule. All I'm trying to get from you is what is your rule. Is your rule that when a judge writes the word acquittal -- an acquittal, by the way, happens to mean there's nothing left for the jury to do on that charge. That's what it means. When he writes the word acquittal, he cannot change it. Is that your rule?
 No. The rule is that the --
 Okay. And what is your rule?
 The rule is that the judge cannot change it, as a matter of Federal constitutional law, if there are further proceedings. In a multi-count case, count A is acquitted. We initiate further proceedings on count B and C.
 But your answer just isn't responsive. When has it become final?
 It ripens at the --
 When? When the judge says something, when he writes something? When does it become final? At what point in time?
 What I'm suggesting is --
 What is your proposed rule? You haven't said yet.
 What -- what I'm suggesting is -- is two things.
 Just one thing. Just when does it become final? Let's limit it to one thing.
 It -- it becomes final when there are further proceedings initiated.
 Sorry. I don't understand that.
 That doesn't make sense.
 The -- the -- that is the line drawn by most of the lower courts.
 You're not understanding my question then. Imagine a case in which a judge writes the word acquittal. Now, half an hour later, he thinks, oh, my God, what have I done. The jury is still sitting there. Of course, they're sitting there because he hasn't had a chance to dismiss them yet. They happened to be having lunch or something. Is it final?
 It is not final --
 It is not final.
 -- if -- if the defense has not been forced at that point to choose to rest or put on a case. That is the --
 Say that again.
 If the defense is forced to rest or put on a case.
 But he wrote the word acquittal. There's nothing more for anybody to do until he changes the word.
 Well, I think we're talking about two separate things. Is Your Honor's question presupposing a single-count case or a multi-count?
 Let's try single-count. Okay?
 Okay.
 There he is. He writes the word acquittal and the jury says, oh, what do we do now? Go home, says the clerk. Now, before they can get out the door or anything else happens, before they get out the door, he says, oh, my God, I made a mistake. Can he do that under your rule?
 I'm not entirely sure of the answer to the question, Your Honor, but I -- I think, first of all, we look at compliance with State procedure.
 Okay. What I thought from reading your brief, which you're confirming, is your rule -- once the judge says acquittal, that's the end of it. If he decides 3 seconds later, he cannot change his mind. Now, that rule to me is inconsistent with most law.
 If we're talking about a clerical error, Your Honor, the Massachusetts rules and the Federal rules provide for correction of clerical errors. What -- what we're talking about here is not a clerical error, but the judge clearly intended to do what she did.
 Well, was your client --
 But a very plain error --
 -- was your client prejudiced in any way by not putting on some evidence that the -- he would have put on?
 May I begin, Your Honor --
 Just answer the question for once.
 Yes, Your Honor. There -- there was a defense that he essentially forfeited by not being aware that the judge was going to, at some point --
 But that was a terribly risky defense because his main defense is I wasn't there, I didn't do it, somebody else did it. How could he then turn around and say I missed the opportunity to tell the jury I really was there, but it was okay for me to have the gun? I mean, what -- what defense counsel would do that after having spent his whole effort to say it was the other guy, it wasn't this defendant? And then to make this defense that he had a right to possess this gun because he belonged in the house, that would be extraordinary.
 Your Honor, counsel for co-defendant, Felicia Brown, presented just such a defense and she was acquitted. She presented the defense that Melvin Smith did not shoot Christopher Robinson, but if Melvin --
 Nobody charged her with possessing a gun.
 But what I'm saying is --
 That's -- look, there were a lot of charges in this case, and we're dealing with what is a relatively lesser offense of this whole string of events so that Brown being acquitted of other offenses doesn't say anything about this offense, which relates to the possession of a gun. That's -- that's all that it is.
 What I'm saying is that it wasn't risky, Your Honor, because the -- this jury was willing to consider an alternative defense that would have otherwise appeared as a concession. They did not take it as a concession.
 But he would be -- the defendant -- you know, he hasn't gone to the jury yet, and the jury would say, my goodness, this is like a common law pleader. I didn't borrow the kettle. It was broken when I got it. Or, I returned it unbroken. To -- to do that, to say I wasn't there, that's my main defense, but then, jury, I'd like you also to consider that if you think that I was there, then -- it -- it really doesn't fly as a criminal defense.
 I'd just respectfully disagree, Your Honor. But -- but the -- the larger point is if we allow this rule in general, we are going to engender serious problems. I'm saying that there -- that there was some reliance here, but we're going to engender much more serious problems in other cases where a defendant perhaps presents a defense that is helpful to the remaining charges, but damaging on the acquitted charge.
 Well, but if -- if -- you know, we shape the expectation by what we say. If -- if we say that a judge is always free to consider his ruling and as long as the -- there's a right to reopen, then any kind of reliance is -- is misplaced.
 What Massachusetts law says in -- in the Zavala case, they said that there is not a right to reopen where the judge has determined that the evidence is insufficient. Second of all --
 That is when the case is not ongoing. I mean, here we had a case that was continuing and -- and the judge said, oops, I made a mistake, which is common at the trial level. I mean, these decisions -- she made this decision in a split second. Maybe she was too hasty, and then a trial judge will say, my law clerk went to the library at lunch, there was a Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts case going just the other way, so of course, I confess error, but the defendant isn't prejudice. The defendant hadn't put on a -- well, the -- it came up at closing. Right? So if the defendant was prejudice, anyway he could have said, wait a minute, judge, I want to put on that defense that I really was there but I had a right to have the gun.
 He didn't say that, Your Honor.
 But he could have. So he -- so I don't see that you have a realistic claim of prejudice.
 Well, I -- I don't think prejudice is a factor in double jeopardy jurisprudence. Either the defendant has been placed twice in jeopardy or he has not.
 Yes, but you have to set a -- a point in time, and your point is -- well, it's not exactly clear, but there's one point that says when the jury is discharged. Then there may be other reasons why there's unfairness to the defendant so that you wouldn't permit it, other than double jeopardy. But if -- why isn't that a sensible place to draw the line?
 Because if -- if discharge of the jury is the rule, then the judge can reconsider an acquittal at any point in a defendant's case. 2 weeks into a defense case, the judge could reconsider an acquittal.
 The question -- we're talking about a Federal constitutional rule, and suppose -- you pointed out this went only to an intermediate appellate court. Suppose the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court interpreted its rule at 25(a) and it says, that rule allows some leeway for the judge to say I got it wrong as long as there's no prejudice to the defense. That's what our rule means.
 I don't think that's permissible, Your Honor. It -- it is -- granted, for purposes of this argument, that it's permissible for States to order judges to withhold rulings, that there shall be no ruling on the sufficiency of the evidence prior to the return of a jury verdict. Louisiana, for example, does that, and I think Oklahoma. But for the Supreme Judicial -- Judicial Court of Massachusetts to say that an acquittal has no force is simply straight contravening what this Court has said. It's -- it's essentially a continuing jeopardy argument.
 But you do agree, I take it, that if the judge says, yes, I agree with you, there isn't a scintilla of evidence, and -- and at some point I'm -- I'm going to enter an acquittal, but I'm not going to do it now just in case I have a second thought, but at least by the -- the end of the trial, I'll take care of it, you, I take it, concede that that is permissible.
 I think that is permissible because --
 Well, if that -- if that's permissible, if you win this case, isn't that going to be the way trials are conducted when -- when there are mid-trial motions like yours? Every judge is going to say, yes, looks as though you -- you got them there, but I'll -- I'll just hold onto this until things are over, and then I'll rule. That's -- that's the way they're all going to respond, isn't it?
 No, I don't think so, Your Honor. I think judges are -- are intelligent people. They read the pleadings beforehand. Justice Donovan clearly read the pleading beforehand in this case, and she -- she was prepared to ask for argument on it. I don't think that judges do these things so precipitously that they are not going to be confident in their ruling.
 No, but every judge knows he drops a catch once in a while, and -- and if he wants to guard against wrecking the whole trial or -- or creating an appellate issue later, he's just going to be cautious and hold onto it.
 And judges should be cautious, Your Honor.
 But isn't it also important to know, though, whether the defendant has to put on a case or not? So he can't just reserve judgment. I'll tell you after the trial is over whether you should put a case on or not.
 That -- that is, in fact, the point, Justice Stevens. The Double Jeopardy Clause is a constitutional policy of finality for the defendant's benefit. He -- that's what this Court said in Jorn. The defendant has to know whether he -- he's defending a case.
 But does -- does --
 Did the defendant here ask to be -- to have the right to reopen?
 He did not.
 May I ask --
 Did he --
 -- you another question here? There -- there were three charges against your client, as I understand it. Unlawful possession of a firearm. That's the one we're talking about.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Assault with intent to murder.
 Yes.
 Assault and battery by means of a dangerous weapon.
 Yes.
 The jury convicted on all three.
 Yes.
 Now, he was given concurrent sentences.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 Is that correct?
 Yes, Your Honor.
 So would you explain to me if there's any practical effect to your winning in this case?
 There is a practical effect.
 What is it?
 Firearm possession offenses in Massachusetts have restrictions as to parole and good time deductions that the other offenses do not have. So there is a practical effect, aside from the fact that it's a -- it's a conviction on his record, Your Honor. Moving on, Justice Breyer, just to address the question that you were asking me, I think perhaps a good way to phrase it is -- is if the first factual resolution of the elements of -- of the offense results in acquittal, there can be no further proceedings.
 What I was thinking is -- I mean, here a judge -- I guess she was harried in the trial, she's thinking to herself, well, let's see, is there any evidence here that this was less than the shotgun -- this was not a shotgun. You know, it had to be a barrel less than 16 inches. So is there any evidence here of the shotgun? And she, I guess, forgot that there was a lot of evidence that it was a pistol. Now, there aren't many pistols that are 16 inches long. So she's thinking, something may be missing here. She's a little uncertain, but she writes acquittal, and then a few minutes later, she thinks, let's say, oh, my God, there was all that evidence about the pistol. So I shouldn't have done that. I mean, how -- how is a judge like that, a hypothetical -- what's she supposed to do? Is she supposed to say, I better not enter anything, because after all, I don't care if the defendant has to produce a case? Or is she supposed to enter something and think, well, I could change my mind before it's over? Or what is she supposed to do? She just thinks she made a mistake.
 So your hypothetical is that there's evidence of two guns?
 I thought here there was evidence there was a pistol, but maybe I'm wrong.
 I'm sorry. Yes, in this case --
 There was evidence it was a pistol. So I -- I would have thought, reading this, that there was evidence. That's beside the point, but I'm -- I'm just using it as an example where a judge might think she made a mistake. She thought there was no evidence that it wasn't a shotgun, and I guess she forgot that there was evidence it was a pistol and a pistol is not a shotgun.
 She -- she clearly didn't forget. The prosecutor said to her the evidence was testified to that it was a pistol, it was a revolver, it was a .32 --
 Well, I'm quite sure -- not quite sure then why she wrote down there was no evidence it wasn't a shotgun, but she had some reason. And now a few minutes later, she thinks, boy, whatever my reason is, it couldn't have been that good. Or maybe she thinks that that's a reason an hour from now or maybe a day from now. What's the line? Suppose she thinks of it a second from now. Suppose she thinks the instant she writes acquittal, she thought, oh, my God, a pistol is not a shotgun. Of course, it isn't. I know that. I better change it. Is it a second from now? Is it she can never change it no matter what once the pen leaves the paper? What's your rule?
 In a single-count case, Your Honor --
 Whether it's single-count or double-count or triple-count. I want to know what -- how you see it, not how I see it.
 It -- compliance with State procedure informs the inquiry and once -- once we have what is determined to be a resolution --
 Once it's final under State procedure, right? And you also would add once there's no clerical error. She didn't mistakenly say, you know, affirm when she meant to write deny. Leaving that aside, once it's final under State procedure, it's final.
 That's correct, Your Honor.
 And sometimes it's wrong.
 That's correct.
 But it'd be sometimes wrong no matter how you define final. I mean, you know, she let's --
 That's excellent.
 -- let's all the evidence on and -- and does it after all the evidence is there, and then she -- and then at the close of all the evidence, she gives a directed verdict for -- for the defendant, and then discharges the jury, and as soon as the jury walks out, oh, my God, what a mistake I made. Too bad. Right? I mean, we say double jeopardy.
 Correct, Your Honor. That's what --
 Excellent. That was an excellent answer. (Laughter.)
 Now, I would like to know, given that answer, why is this final under State procedure because it seems as if the State courts of Massachusetts have said, no, it is not a constitutional error to go and look into this again. She can change her mind. And that's what I'd like you to focus on because I agree that that was a good explanation of the rule.
 If -- if State procedure, as in this --
 I'm thinking of this case.
 Yes.
 Suppose I took Justice Scalia's rule and I said, that's the rule. Now, I would say that's the rule of a Federal law. Very well. That turns on your decision here being final as a matter of State law, but it seems to me we have State courts here saying, at least for double jeopardy purposes, it isn't final as a matter of State law. And therefore, I want to know how we reach your conclusion here.
 Well, there's -- there clearly is a line beyond which the State cannot go, and that's what Justice Brennan was talking about in his concurrence in Lydon. He said the -- the State cannot fashion a procedure whereby the judge never discharges the jury, and in -- in Kepner, this Court held that the Philippine procedure of withholding finality from an acquittal in a bench trial also violated the Constitution. So State procedure does not control. It is sufficient but not necessary. If -- if you comply with State procedure to say this is -- this is an acquittal, okay, it's an acquittal. If you do not comply with State procedure, it can still be an acquittal under Federal law.
 Does the State have the power to say whether -- whether an acquittal under State law constitutes an acquittal for purposes of Federal constitutional double jeopardy purposes? Is that a State law question or a Federal question?
 No. It -- it is a Federal question, Your Honor. This Court --
 I thought it was.
 -- this Court said that in Smalis quite clearly. If I -- if I may, two things and then I'd like to reserve. But the -- the State would have this Court draw a distinction between acquittals by a judge and acquittals by a jury. That simply has been rejected by this Court numerous times. Sanabria, Rumsey. An acquittal is an acquittal. Again, the -- the State would have this Court draw distinctions between acquittals based on law and acquittals based on fact. Sanabria unequivocally rejected that. Sanabria says that in fact sufficiency of the evidence is not a legal defense. An acquittal is an acquittal. If there are no further questions, I'd like to reserve the balance of my time.
 Yes. Ms. Neaves.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: I'd like to start with where the Court left off on the notion of reconsideration and finality. The Massachusetts Appeals Court here specifically stated that a judge's right to reconsider his or her legal rulings is firmly rooted in the common law and permitted Judge Donovan in this case to reconsider her legal ruling that the evidence was insufficient. Certainly that common law right of reconsideration could not run afoul of this Court's double jeopardy jurisprudence, but the appeals court specifically stated that the Double Jeopardy Clause was not violated because there was no second proceeding and that the judge in this case, therefore, was permitted to reconsider her ruling.
 What if -- what if this had been the sole count, the gun possession count had been the sole count, and -- and the same ruling had been made by the judge? Would you say that there was double jeopardy attaching or not?
 Not so long as the jury was still there. If the prosecutor had the opportunity to say, Judge Donovan, give me 10 minutes, I know there's a Supreme Judicial Court case on the point that I'm arguing to you, which is that you did not need a witness to directly testify that the gun barrel length was less than 16 inches, I know there's a case, give me 10 minutes, take a recess, and if the judge agreed to do that and the prosecutor came back and gave the case to the judge and the judge said, absolutely, you're -- you're correct, I'm going to send the charge to the jury, there's no double jeopardy violation there.
 And what if it's a bench trial?
 A bench trial is a very difficult situation. And the Smalis case certainly seems to be the hardest case here, but bench trials present different -- a different situation because the judge is both the fact-finder and the law-giver. And in that context, it's much more difficult --
 I know it's difficult. What's your answer?
 My answer to that is I believe that if the judge stated the evidence is insufficient, as -- as the judge did in Smalis, as the trier of fact and law, I find the evidence --
 It's over.
 It's over. It's over.
 The minute --
 What if in the case --
 -- the minute he --
 -- we have before us the State allowed an interlocutory appeal on behalf of the prosecution right after the judge's ruling?
 In a jury case, Your Honor?
 Yes.
 I think --
 Conceivably they could allow an interlocutory appeal from a judgment of acquittal at the close of the prosecution's case.
 If such a -- if such a process could be put in place where there was an appellate panel that would be willing and available to hear that while the jury remained empaneled, I don't think it would run afoul of the Double Jeopardy Clause.
 Well --
 But is that necessary? I -- I mean, that's what I think is the difficult question here. Can you say that it's final for purposes of the decision-maker outside that courtroom, namely an appellate court, but it's not final in respect to the judge having a right to change his mind within the court? That -- that makes a lot of sense to me, but I don't know if it's possible to get there. Why not? I -- I think, well, the reason is that you want judges to be able to reconsider things and you don't have that problem when you're talking about an appeal.
 That is --
 Or is there any -- is there any, in other words, to reconcile our case that you're talking about, Smalis?
 The Smalis case?
 Yes, yes.
 I think there are a number of ways to reconcile it. Certainly Massachusetts' position is that it's the difference between a bench trial and a jury trial, but there is also no doubt that the case left the trial court and went up on appeal. I think both of those factors are significant.
 No, but isn't -- isn't the significance supposedly the existence or nonexistence of our continuation of the jury panel, going back to Justice Stevens' question? And what if the -- what if the State had a procedure whereby the trial judge would simply decline to discharge the jury panel if an appeal were taken from the acquittal motion so that if he was tipped over, it could come right back to the same jury panel? Would -- would the -- would the answer have to be different?
 I don't think it would.
 Why?
 I think -- I think for a -- I think for my -- to my way of thinking about the cases, the jury is what matters and it's the defendant's right to his particular tribunal, and that's the first jury that's empaneled --
 No, but on my hypothesis he's going to get the same jury.
 Exactly.
 They have not been discharged.
 Exactly. So I would say that it would not be a violation of the Double Jeopardy Clause, and that's why --
 Wow. It goes all the way up on appeal and the jury -- I -- I don't know what the -- I guess he lets the jury go home for a couple of months or while the appeal is pending and then when the decision is overturned by the court of appeals, he comes back and recommences the trial? Wow.
 All right. If that's so, then why shouldn't Smalis have gone the other way? Because they can send it right back to exactly the same judge.
 Because he -- he is the trier of fact, and I think at that point --
 Well, the jury is the trier of fact.
 That's --
 I mean, on the hypothesis before, you're saying if they don't discharge the jury and it can go back to them, no double jeopardy problem. In Smalis, it's going to be the same judge. It was a bench trial. It should have come out the other way.
 Well, I think the difference is the -- the judge in Smalis was the trier of fact. He made a rule -- he is both the trier of fact and the law-giver. He's decided that the evidence is insufficient. If that case goes up on appeal, that is -- that is factual -- that is oversight of his factual determination in essence.
 Isn't it ordinarily true --
 Is -- is another -- is another difference -- and I don't know if this -- is another difference that in the hypothetical case with the jury, the jury has not yet deliberated --
 Thank you.
 -- in order to consider the facts.
 Yes.
 Whereas in your --
 Yes, but --
 -- your case, the -- the judge is -- is --
 May I ask this?
 -- apparently deliberating --
 Is it not true that in this --
 That's where I was headed.
 -- in this case the judge did not reconsider until the end of the defense case?
 That is correct, Justice Stevens.
 But, during that period, did the defense lawyer have the right to rely on the acquittal in deciding whether or not to put in defensive evidence on the count from which he thought his client had been acquitted?
 Well, he certainly had some sense of reliance, but it wasn't a double jeopardy reliance. And I would -- I would point the Court to --
 Of course, if the Double Jeopardy Clause did apply, if it were treated as a true acquittal, he could just say, well, we can forget about that, send your witnesses home, we won't have to worry about it. I understand under your view they could send the witnesses home, and a week -- a week later the judge could say, well, we haven't submitted it to the jury, I've decided to change my mind. You could bring all those witnesses back. That's the way you think it should work.
 Absolutely, Justice Stevens. And I think --
 What -- what about a judge who thinks -- should the judge -- should a judge in trial be able to change his mind as long as the jury is still there? Yes.
 Yes.
 Should you be able to take an appeal in the same circumstance while the jury is still there? No. Now, suppose a judge thinks both those things. Is that judge, like me, for example, hopelessly confused? (Laughter.)
 Is the judge thinking contradictory things or is there a way of reconciling those two instincts?
 I -- Justice Breyer, I -- I certainly believe that the -- that the double jeopardy rule that we're -- we're advocating would permit that, but I -- I think that most trial judges would not be very pleased about doing something like that. And practically speaking, there's --
 By the way, if it's constitutional, it's pretty easy to see a State might well say, let's do that, what a good idea. I mean, they might think it's a good idea. I don't know what people think is a good idea. We'll provide for interlocutory appeals right in the middle of cases because the prosecution can never appeal at the end of the case. That's really unfair. And we'll do this little thing here, and that way we give the prosecutor a chance.
 I -- I have to stick with the rule that -- that --
 All right. You think it's -- I'm just inconsistent.
 I think it -- I -- well, it's -- it's -- I think if -- I think if you accept the notion that jury discharge is what matters for purposes of the Double Jeopardy Clause and permitting a trial judge to reconsider a legal ruling up to that point, then if a State court could fashion an interlocutory review process of that legal ruling, that would not violate the Double Jeopardy Clause.
 What is the conceptual basis for saying that jury discharge makes the difference? Why is that the touchstone?
 I think this Court has said over and over again that it is the jury -- the defendant's right to hold onto his chosen jury that matters in a number of different contexts in the double jeopardy area. This Court has drawn the line at attachment of jeopardy when the jury is empaneled and sworn based on the historical value of a defendant having that particular jury resolve the government's case against him. And so I think that it matters, particularly where a motion for a required finding is not constitutionally mandated. It's a tool that --
 I would think prejudice to the defendant should be a factor, and if the defendant is misled by what the judge says into not putting on part of the case that otherwise would have been put on, that's a pretty serious matter.
 That is a very serious matter, and it is the sort of prejudice that falls within the rubric of due process and -- and --
 No, but we usually don't use --
 -- would grant you a retrial.
 -- we don't use the -- I mean, you could use the Due Process Clause for everything, for double jeopardy, for all of the other protections in the Constitution. I think our cases say if -- if there's a problem that has been created by ignoring the double jeopardy rules, you don't solve that problem by -- by the deus ex machina of the Due Process Clause.
 No. That's -- that's exactly correct.
 What about --
 So this a problem created by the judge's dismissal, and which this defendant had every reason to rely upon as being the end of that part of the case. I'm inclined to say if -- if that is a problem, in fairness it's a -- it's a double jeopardy problem, not a due process problem.
 Well, with respect, Justice Scalia, I would say it is the sort of reliance that a -- that a defendant may have, as for example the case in Sanabria, where a -- where a judge excludes certain evidence, and the case goes forward. And as a result of that -- a result of that decision, the judge in that case granted a motion for acquittal. And at the end of the case, the prosecution asked for reconsideration of the exclusion of the evidence, and the judge ultimately determined not to go ahead and let that evidence back in, but specifically said if I had let it back in, I would have vacated my motion for required finding and allowed the case to go to the jury. So that sort of prejudice -- a defendant has an expectation of certain things that may or may not happen at trial, but the remedy outside of the double jeopardy context, if the defendant is acquitted, is a retrial. The drastic remedy of double jeopardy is -- is used when a defendant has been subjected twice to a trial before a second trier of fact. This -- this Court has been consistent that when the government subjects the defendant over and over again before a second --
 I understand you correctly to say that if the defendant is acquitted, the remedy is a retrial?
 No, no, no. I'm sorry, Justice Stevens. No. Only if the defendant is convicted is the remedy a retrial because, indeed, if the jury acquits him, there is no harm at all.
 What is the reason you didn't want a fairly simple rule that I was thinking of? I'll tell you what it is and you'll tell me honestly why you don't. It's final. The word acquittal is -- is final if the jury has been discharged or the decision is sent to another body for review. One or the other.
 I could live with that rule.
 Now, so you haven't found something in your research that suggests that -- that --
 No, no. Our position has been consistent.
 Well, under -- under that view of things, suppose in this -- in this case there's a motion for acquittal and the judge says, yes, I -- I think there's no evidence on the gun. Then the prosecutor says I want 10 minutes because I think there's a case on it. Then he says, you know, there's a case and I think it covers this, and the judge says, well, I think you may be wrong. I'll let you reopen to put on evidence of -- of the gun. What would -- what would be the result in that case?
 I think that because if it's a jury trial and the case is still -- and the jury is still there, it could be done without violating the Double Jeopardy Clause.
 I think you have to say that under your view.
 I think so. I think honing -- what this Court has talked about in honing is -- is refining a case before a second trier of fact. And as a matter of Massachusetts' procedures, certainly the prosecution may be able to reopen if there's good faith or mistake, but for purposes of --
 Then why did the Massachusetts Supreme Court say -- and I thought it did say this in its rules -- trial judge, you rule on the spot when a motion to acquit is made? We will not allow you to reserve judgment. Because the normal thing would be a trial judge would say, why should I decide this definitively now? I'll wait till the end of the case. But as I understand the Massachusetts rules, it says, judge, you can't reserve on a motion to acquit. You must rule immediately.
 That is correct, Justice Ginsburg, and if I misunderstood the hypothetical, that -- that was my mistake. As a matter of Massachusetts law, a trial judge does not have that option. She must rule on the motion before the defendant decides to put on the case, and that is what happened here.
 So -- so part of Justice Breyer's question needs editing because it would not be possible under Massachusetts law for the judge to say --
 That is correct.
 -- I reserve.
 That is correct. She could not. And -- and if I could just highlight a couple of points to -- to demonstrate the significance of -- of permitting trial judges the ability to reconsider legal rulings. In Massachusetts, the fact that there's a written motion here is quite unusual. These motions are made orally generally. The prosecution is not given an opportunity -- does not -- there's no requirement that he be given advance notice ever. There's no requirement of that. The prosecution argues in opposition to the motion on the spot, and the judge rules on the spot. And -- and I think that -- that procedure is demonstrated quite clearly here. The -- the defendant filed the motion. The prosecution did, indeed, argue the correct response, legal response, did not have a case at hand and as --
 Your position would be the same if the -- if the Massachusetts law provided that the motions at the end of the prosecution's case shall not be ruled on unless -- after they're written briefs filed by both sides and they have 3 days of argument. You'd still have the same position.
 That's true.
 And in fact, the -- the quick and dirty procedure you describe is probably a boon to prosecutors because a judge is -- is not likely to take the serious step of dismissing a charge on the basis of -- of such a procedure and is more likely to say, well, we'll let the trial go ahead and see what the evidence discloses. I mean, I can't imagine that this is not a boon to the prosecutor rather than, as you -- as you seem to paint it here, a disadvantage.
 I -- I wouldn't want to characterize --
 This is a very unusual judge I would think to --
 Yes.
 -- to whip it out like that and -- and enter an acquittal without -- without letting it go forward.
 I would say it is unusual, but it happens where -- and I think the trial judge certainly in this case who believes that if she's mistaken, can -- can correct her ruling and send it to the jury, then feels somewhat free to -- to do what the defendant asks, if it seems reasonable, and -- and knows that if -- if it can be corrected --
 You may -- you may regret what you've asked for.
 I hope not, Justice Scalia. I hope not. I think --
 What would happen -- I think one of the briefs suggested that suppose you have a multi-defendant case and the judge says, after the prosecution case is done, defendant A, I'm going to grant a motion to acquit. He's out of it, but there was enough evidence to require the -- the defense to go on for B and C. And then after hearing B and C's defense, the judge said, I think I was wrong about acquitting A, so I'm -- I'm going to withdraw it. Would there be -- could that be done without any -- any double jeopardy bar? The jury hasn't been discharged.
 Justice Ginsburg, I don't think it presents a double jeopardy bar, but a defendant has a right to be present at his trial, and so it certainly would be a reversible error if -- if a trial judge --
 Well, the -- the -- he's sitting there. Defendant A is sitting there throughout the whole trial.
 Then there's certainly no double jeopardy bar to that.
 There could be a problem that you have to have a fair chance to present evidence and so forth.
 Absolutely, Justice Breyer, and -- and --
 I guess there are a lot of rules in Massachusetts that deal with that. They can't -- you have to be fair to the defendant in -- is that right?
 Well, certainly. Rule 25 itself specifically states that the defendant shall have the opportunity to present evidence after the motion is denied or allowed in part without reserving that right. So certainly that option is available. Unless the Court has further questions.
 Thank you, Ms. Neaves.
 Thank you.
 Mr. -- Mr. Srinivasan.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The trial court in this case was permitted to correct its erroneous ruling in favor of the defendant on the motion for judgment of acquittal. Because the prosecution is entitled to a full and fair opportunity to prove its case, that's a value --
 May I ask you the same question I asked your -- your colleague? Supposing we're not in Massachusetts, but we're in another State that provided for an interlocutory appeal immediately after the judge's ruling in this case. Would -- would you have the same appraisal of the case on those facts?
 Would we have the same appraisal as the State? We don't --
 Yes. Would you still say it was not final, even though it was sufficiently final for appellate purposes?
 No. We -- we think that the Court's holding in Smalis applies equally to jury trials and to bench trials such that an appeal, an interlocutory appeal, in the midst of a jury trial would not be permissible. But we also think that there is a sound basis for drawing a distinction between --
 But my question is assuming a State procedure in which the interlocutory appeal was permissible, you -- you would say Double Jeopardy Clause would bar that appeal.
 Right, because we read that to be the holding of Smalis. But we think there's a basis for distinguishing between appeals on one hand and continuing proceedings before the initial tribunal on the other hand. First of all, this Court has drawn that distinction in Swisher v. Brady where it initially said that the two-stage system of adjudication is -- in Maryland that was at issue in that case was permissible because it entailed continued proceedings before the initial tribunal rather than an appeal to a second tribunal. And the Court specifically distinguished its prior decisions in Jenkins v. the United States and Kepner, both of which involved appellate review. And the other basis for drawing a distinction between appeals on one hand and reconsiderations by the trial court on the other is historical tradition. I think the Court could look to history and history would show that on one hand trial courts have always had inherent authority to reconsider their mid-trial rulings because the practical exigencies of trial are such that trial courts inevitably will err on occasion, and the ends of justice require trial courts to have the authority to revisit their mid-trial rulings.
 Would -- would you allow a trial judge to reopen -- to -- to permit the prosecution to reopen the case?
 We would, Justice Kennedy, but it raises a distinct problem because one value that's served by the Double Jeopardy Clause is the defendant's interest in preventing the prosecution from honing its evidentiary case by repeated efforts. And if the trial judge were permitted to reopen the case to give the prosecution that opportunity, it at least would implicate that interest. Now, we still think that the proper line is jury discharge, but we understand that that hypothetical would present a distinct interest. Now, with respect to historical tradition on appeals, the historical tradition is clear that the government has lacked authority at common law to take an appeal in a criminal proceeding. This Court relied on that common law tradition as early as Sanges v. the United States and it's repeated that understanding in Carroll v. the United States and Arizona v. Manypenny, and that's why the Court construes statutory grants of authority to the government to take an appeal in criminal cases quite narrowly. And so I think the Court could draw a distinction between reconsiderations by the trial court and appeals by looking to historical tradition, and the Court often looks at history to shape the contours of double jeopardy protections. And that would afford the case -- the Court a basis for saying that in Smalis, while appeals were forbidden, in this case trial court reconsideration should be permitted. And I think the lens through which the Court would do that under the Double Jeopardy Clause is the valued interest in giving the prosecution one full and fair opportunity to prove its case in the sense that while that full and fair opportunity may exclude an appeal, because the Court held as much in Smalis, it doesn't exclude reconsiderations.
 Why -- why doesn't the -- the prosecution gets its full and fair opportunity if we have a rule that says to trial judges, when you make a ruling on acquittal, you better be serious and you better not make a snap judgment, think it over, because once you've done it, it sticks? Why -- why doesn't the prosecution have a perfectly fair opportunity under that rule? Everybody knows where he stands and judges, we hope, are going to be careful.
 Justice Souter, we think a constitutional rule that would turn on the definitiveness of a trial court ruling would be flawed in three respects. First, the line between a definitive ruling and a tentative ruling is not altogether clear, and we've outlined in our brief at page 24 in a lengthy footnote a variety of factual scenarios that come from real cases where trial judges, as they often do, rendered a ruling on a motion for acquittal orally, and whether you think that ruling was definitive or tentative might depend on which page of the transcript you happen to be looking at. But even if we're dealing with a situation in which the ruling clearly falls on the definitive side of the line, you'd still have the problem that a trial court might be convinced that it's correct and rule definitively but still be incorrect. Trial courts make mistakes. That's why this issue comes up as often as it does. For example, in this case --
 All these cases -- we've had several, not too many over the -- the whole line of cases -- and the trial judge has always committed a rather plain error. And we all have the case where if you just try to decide whether it's a just result, you'd always say no. A case just like this. The judge made a mistake, but we've always said that's not something we -- we look at.
 I don't -- I'm not quite sure I'm following what you're saying, Justice Stevens, because --
 I say as a typical matter these double jeopardy claims arise in cases in which the judge made a rather plain error, and when you look at it later, you say, gee, he goofed. And so I'm not sure we should consider the plainness of the error or the fact that they -- they do mistakes because they do.
 But -- but I don't -- but the reason why the Court accepts errors in some situations is because there's some other value under the Double Jeopardy Clause.
 The value of finality is what is really at stake here.
 Well, it's not just the value of finality. It's that, for example, if the judge makes an error and then the jury is discharged, it's the value that the defendant has in obtaining a result from the particular tribunal. In the circumstances of this case, where the trial judge can correct her error within the -- within a matter of minutes, at least in some situations, there would be no double jeopardy purpose served --
 But here it was not a matter of minutes.
 In this --
 Here it was --
 No. I acknowledge in this case it wasn't, but it might well be in some cases. For example, we cite a decision of the Washington Supreme Court, State v. Collins, which involves essentially the same scenario as this case, but the only distinction was that after the trial judge initially announced her ruling, the prosecution had the precedent in hand and within a span of 10 minutes, the trial judge was able to realize her error and to correct her ruling and reinstate the charge.
 Does it matter if the -- if the ruling is conveyed to the jury even though the jury isn't discharged?
 It would matter, Justice O'Connor, but I don't think it would necessarily preclude the prosecution from going forward on the charge under the Double Jeopardy Clause. The question would be one of due process and prejudice to the defendant.
 You had three -- three reasons you were going to give Justice Souter. One is it's not clear always that it's definitive. The other is that trial judges do make mistakes, and the third is?
 And the third is -- it's an issue that you raised earlier, Justice Kennedy. It's that this case might look different as an atmospheric matter if the trial judge at the time she rendered her ruling had said, I'm ruling in the defendant's favor, but I may reconsider this decision at a later point in the proceedings. Now, that might be seen to fall on the tentative side of the line, but that's exactly the effect of this -- of the trial judge's ruling as a matter of Massachusetts law. And we don't think there's a constitutionally significant distinction between a trial judge explicitly saying that a ruling can be reconsidered and State law saying that the ruling can be reconsidered.
 Why isn't the distinction the right to rely?
 It -- there -- there -- that would be the basis of a claim, Justice Souter, but the right to rely is, in essence, a notice prejudice sort of claim and that could be handled in the way that trial courts typically handle claims by the defendant that they've detrimentally relied on an initial ruling the trial court has subsequently reconsidered. It would be equally the case, for example, as the State mentioned with respect to an evidentiary ruling that barred the prosecution from introducing a category of evidence, but then the trial judge, later in the proceedings, wanted to revisit that ruling. The question would be whether revisiting the ruling resulted in prejudice to the defendant because the defendant had detrimentally relied on the trial judge's initial determination. And we don't think that prejudice inquiry is meaningfully different when you're dealing with evidentiary rulings as when you're -- as when you're dealing with the reinstatement of a previously acquitted charge.
 Why -- why shouldn't you have -- what's magic about the jury? Why shouldn't you have the same rule on a bench trial? A judge in a bench trial makes a ruling, thinks about it, and says, you know, I shouldn't have ruled that way. Why shouldn't that judge be able to change? Just because there's no jury to discharge.
 Well, it would depend. If -- if the bench trial judge were making a mid-trial ruling, as -- as in this case, then the judge could change his or her mind. But if the bench trial judge were resolving the entire case and entered --
 What -- what is the line? I mean, is there -- there no point at which he can't change? I mean --
 No. The -- the -- I think the Constitution would step in and impose a line at some point, and probably the best indicator is a rule --
 But it's not dismissal of the jury. We'll have to make up some other line. Right?
 It can't be discharge of the jury, but I think where the Court would look, first and foremost, in defining a line for bench trials, if the issue would ever arise, would be a ruling that would essentially have resulted in discharge of the jury if the trial were before a jury. And for example, the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure --
 But how do we -- how does Smalis fit into this discussion? I thought in Smalis in a bench trial, we said it was final.
 It was, Justice O'Connor, for purposes of an appeal, and that's why I think the critical distinction between Smalis and this case is that where the prosecution might not have authority to take an appeal from a ruling on the insufficiency of the evidence.
 Your line would be something like if it -- if -- from all of the transcript, it appears that the judge is -- is giving consideration to the entire case or something like that in a bench trial.
 In a bench trial, that -- that would be part of the inquiry, Justice Kennedy, and I would also point, by the way, to -- can I just finish the thought, Justice Stevens? To Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 32(k)(1), which says that when a bench trial -- when a judge sitting in a bench trial issues a ruling that finds a defendant not guilty, that ruling will discharge the defendant. And I think a discharge of the defendant would be one of critical consideration. Thank you.
 Thank you. Mr. Nathanson, you have about 3 minutes left.
 Justice Stevens, may it please the Court: I'll try to be as brief as I can. The argument about inherent authority to reconsider an acquittal really has it backwards. Inherent authority bends to the Constitution. The Constitution does not bend to a judge's inherent authority. Second, the -- the Government is trying to substitute a standard here of a second proceeding, which is not this Court's standard. This Court's standard is further proceedings after an acquittal, including resumption of the same trial. That's what this Court said in Smalis. The Government is also trying to move this case into the particular tribunal analysis. That comes from cases that are mistrials. This is an acquittal. This is not a particular tribunal case. As to the judge resolving all the issues in a bench trial and -- and that's why that -- that acquittal would be more final than a motion for a directed verdict, it was a motion for a directed verdict. It was a demurrer in Smalis. It was the exact same standard that the judge applied in that case. As to prejudice, prejudice has never been a factor in this Court's double jeopardy analysis. As a matter of fact, in -- in one of the really classical statements, Ex parte Lange, if you look at the facts of that case, that looks like complete gamesmanship. The defendant was sentenced to a jail term and a fine when the -- the statute only authorized a jail term or a fine. He said, oh, I'll pay -- I'll pay the fine. It's a get-out-of-jail-free card. There's complete gamesmanship, but prejudice was not a factor. And in fact, this Court has said prejudice is not open to judicial examination in double jeopardy cases. As to honing, in -- in fact, in Rumsey --
 Honing?
 Honing. Not the name of a case, Your Honor. But whether or not the Government has honed its cased through -- and -- and they would say evidentiary honing. But it's not evidentiary honing. In Rumsey, it was only argument that was presented at -- at the remand after acquittal. Justice Souter, I want to heartily endorse the -- the way you phrased what the rule should be, which is, trial judges, you ought to take this seriously. Pretermitting the prosecution's case is a very serious matter. You cannot take it back. So think about it. Do it right the first time. As to -- to rule 25 itself, it's true that the -- the judges can't reserve. So what they do as -- as a matter of practice in Massachusetts is they simply deny, and -- and they deny the first one and they have two more opportunities, one at the close of the defendant's case and they have an opportunity at the close of -- after the jury has returned a verdict. At each of those steps, they can make a motion for acquittal. As to the full and fair opportunity, this Court said in Martin Linen that the Government has a right to try the case. They do not have a right to have it proceed to verdict. I'm just taking that straight from Martin Linen. As to, finally, whether or not State law sort of insulates this from Federal -- I see my time is up. Thank you.
 Mr. Nathanson, thank you. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument next in No. 03-878, Clark v. Martinez, and No. 03-7434, Benitez v. Rozos. Mr. Kneedler.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: These cases implicate the fundamental power of the United States to protect its borders by excluding aliens who arrive at its borders, but are found under the law not to qualify for admission. This Court held more than 100 years ago in Nishimura Ekiu that the power of a nation to forbid the entrance of foreigners within its dominions is inherent in sovereignty and is central to self-preservation. If it were otherwise, the integrity of the Nation's borders and its security would be at the mercy of a foreign power who might choose to foist aliens onto our country or to the self-help efforts of aliens who might leave another country coming to our shores. The migration crises involving Haitians and Cubans over the last 35 years vividly illustrate the adverse consequences of such a regime, and events of recent years confirm that the threats to the Nation's borders and security are not limited to nearby nations.
 But this Court held only 3 years ago that the statute before us here does not permit the Attorney General to hold the alien indefinitely.
 The -- the Court addressed one of the statutes before the Court here. It's -- it's important I -- I think to recognize another statute and -- that is -- reflects the background principle of this Court's decision in Mezei. And if I may explain, to do that. This Court made clear in Mezei that an alien has no substantive due process right to enter the United States when the executive branch has determined, under the law, that he has no right to enter the United States. The relevant --
 But, Mr. Kneedler, recognizing that distinction, is that a distinction drawn by the statute that's before us?
 Yes, I believe it is, but it -- but -- but first of all, there is another statute which is highly relevant to this, and that is 1182(d)(5)(A), the parole statute. It is the parole statute that -- that has long governed whether an alien who arrives at our shores and has not been shown to be admissible may enter the United -- may enter the United States. The parole statute is set forth at petition appendix 3a -- excuse me -- page 3a of our brief. That is the only statute that affirmatively authorizes aliens to enter the United States. That statute is -- obviously confers no rights. It is written entirely in terms of the discretion of the Attorney General, now the Secretary of Homeland Security. It says the Attorney -- the Secretary may, in his discretion, temporarily under conditions that he prescribes and for urgent and humanitarian reasons, parole an alien into the United States. But it says that parole does not constitute an admission, and it may be revoked at any time when the Secretary in his opinion concludes that the purposes of the parole have been satisfied.
 So are you -- are you arguing now that -- that (5)(A) -- (d)(5)(A), is the statute under which you are detaining him and that 1231(a)(6) has nothing to do with the case?
 No. They -- they are independent authorities for the detention --
 So -- so you're arguing -- then you are. You're saying -- this is coming to me a little bit anew. I perhaps didn't read it carefully enough. But I thought -- let's assume you lose on 1231(a)(6), that I can't think of a way. Let's assume that I can't think of a way of applying the same words to your alien to mean something different than were applied to the alien who was in Zadvydas. Suppose you lose on that point. Now you're saying, well, independently of that, we have a different statute under which we can detain him, namely 1182(d)(5)(A). Is that --
 Yes, absolutely, and the -- and the --
 Now -- now is that argument -- I mean, I'm sorry that I --
 Yes, and we -- we make -- we do make that argument in our brief.
 -- and that -- and so is that made in the courts below and everything that they're doing in the cases --
 Yes. We made it at -- we made it in both courts below, and we -- and we think it's clear from the background of -- of this statute that it does -- that it does confer independent authority.
 But this statute just -- just goes in a circle because it ends. The way end -- (A) ends is that after revoking the parole, the alien shall forthwith return or be returned to the custody from which he was paroled and thereafter his case shall continue to be dealt with in the same manner as that of any other applicant for admission to the United States, which refers you back to -- to 1231(a)(6).
 No. With respect, it doesn't. 1231(a)(6) is an additional -- on its face is an additional grant of detention authority. It is not -- but whereas, the -- the parole authority which -- which for years until --
 Well, this shall continue to be dealt with in the same manner as that of any other applicant --
 And an --
 Dealt with includes, it seems to me, 1231(a)(6).
 An applicant for admission includes anyone who has been found not to be admissible to the United States. 8 U.S.C. 1225(a)(1) provides that any -- any alien in the United States who has not affirmatively been found to be admissible is an applicant for admission. And the -- the statutes dealing with applicants for admission or aliens who arrive at our shore establish that detention, even indefinite detention, is -- is not only permitted, but required unless the Secretary releases someone.
 How would that -- how would that apply to someone who hasn't gotten parole, hasn't gotten any permission, who snuck across the border? That's one of the pieces of this that's incomprehensible, that you are suggesting someone can be detained indefinitely who we allowed in temporarily, but such treatment could not occur with respect to somebody that had no permission at any time to be here.
 Yes. Well, the -- the parole statute -- if someone was taken into custody, the parole -- who had sneaked across the border, that person, under the 1996 revisions, is an applicant for -- for admission, and the parole statute would govern that. As a constitutional matter, and particularly with respect to procedural due process, the Court has suggested in a number of its cases that there may be a difference between somebody who arrives at our borders and -- and is stopped and somebody who -- who sneaks through. At least as a procedural matter, the Government would have to establish that he has no right to be here. But --
 But may I --
 Well, are -- are you saying that if an alien on -- who seeks admission and is denied admission and is at Ellis Island or the JKF Airport, that the Attorney General is -- does not have to consult 1231(a)(6)?
 No. We believe the parole statute furnishes independent authority --
 Where does it say -- I mean, the reason I guess I missed it is because when I looked at your table of contents and elsewhere in the brief, it seems phrased totally in terms of 1231(a)(6). That's the heading. Each argument seems to support that. And then on page -- you know, when you refer to this, I guess on page 26, you're talking in a section about what 1231 must be because of the structure of it. And then you refer to other provisions such as the one you're now mentioning. I just didn't pick up that it was a totally independent basis.
 Right. And -- and if I may, the -- the special statutes that govern the parole of Mariel Cubans that we reproduce in the appendix to our brief at 212.12 were promulgated in 1987 before 1231(a)(6) was enacted in 1996.
 All right, but where does it say that? I'd like to just glance at it even now. Where does it say that in your brief, that it's a totally independent basis?
 On page 12 -- 26 to 27.
 That's what I read and it was in a structure called the statutory and -- text and structure support the Secretary's detention authority, which is under a bigger heading saying the text, structure, and history of section 1231(a)(6) confirm the executive branch's authority.
 I should -- I should also --
 So perhaps I could be forgiven for not understanding --
 And -- and I should also point out that -- that in -- in our response to the petition in the Benitez petition, we expressly -- we expressly argued that 1182(d)(5)(A) is an independent source of authority.
 But if -- if there's a statute that directs you with reference to a class, that statute is applicable, and this person is within that class. So how can you tell us we can't go or that we needn't go to 1231?
 My -- my point is that's not the exclusive basis. I'm not saying that it's inapplicable to this category. But --
 Well, it might be exclusive constitutionally, but the Congress has acted.
 Or -- or --
 And once it's acted, you're controlled.
 Well, or -- or -- but -- but what Congress -- if I may go back to the parole statute, before 1231(a)(6) was enacted, the only statute that governed the detention and the release of aliens arriving at our shores, what used to be called excludable aliens, was the parole statute. That provision -- until the aliens before this Court were ordered --
 By which you mean -- parole statute, by which you mean?
 1182(d)(5)(A). Yes.
 Okay.
 And until there is an order of exclusion, even now the parole statute is the only statute that governs the detention and release of the alien. And I think it would be impossible to read into 1182(d)(5)(A) any 6-month limitation or any limitation at all on how long someone can be detained because that statute sets up a presumption of custody with release only in the discretion of the Attorney General, or now the Secretary of -- of Homeland Security.
 May I interrupt you there, Mr. Kneedler? Because I mean, the question is whether constitutionally we should respect that presumption. And -- and my -- my question basically is this. I can perfectly well understand and I can understand the -- the argument for respecting that presumption. When you're dealing with excluded aliens who are in a literal territorial sense within the border but are never allowed, in effect, beyond a point of initial custody, the ones who are kept at Ellis Island or wherever one may -- may keep them. It is difficult, however, I -- I think to accept what has been called the -- the fiction of custody. When we are dealing with individuals who, although absolutely excludable, were nonetheless welcomed into the United States by a public announcement of the President of the United States, have been allowed into the American population, just as clearly and as readily as they would have been under any other protocol of admission -- and I guess in this case for something like 20 years -- isn't there a point at which the -- the fiction of exclusion simply cannot be accepted for constitutional purposes?
 There are a number of responses to that. First, as a factual matter, with respect to welcoming into the United States, what gets cited for that proposition is a statement by President Carter in May 5 of 1980. 10 days later, before the aliens in this case came to this country, he made clear that people should not do this. He encouraged people not to go to Cuba. The INS brought enforcement actions against people who went there. There were criminal prosecutions that were brought. So people were not encouraged to come to the United States in this way. With respect to the regime that you say -- I believe you said they're -- they're admitted just like under any other regime. That is not correct.
 Well, factually. They're allowed into the country. You know, they can get jobs, own property, et cetera.
 They were allowed into the country under the parole statute that I just read, which makes -- which makes it clear that they are admitted not -- not in a way that confers any rights on them, but they are admitted in the interest of the United States for public benefits under circumstances which make clear that it is not an admission and that --
 No. I realize but they are admitted in the sense that they say, okay, you can come in and you can do these things, but you get no -- in effect, you get no vested right. We can take it away like that.
 No -- no vested right to come into the United States. It is, in effect, a revocable --
 All right. But otherwise -- otherwise they are treated like any other class of aliens who are admitted into the United States. They are subject to this condition. The United States makes that clear, but they nonetheless can be in the country and do in the country what other aliens can do.
 At the sufferance of the United States.
 I -- I know. Subject to that condition.
 And -- and the question we have here is when the -- when and if the United States, pursuant to this statute, decides no longer to suffer the aliens being at large, but instead return them to the border, in effect, or return them to detention, this statute makes clear that that -- that whatever practical experience they have had at large in the country is always subject to revocation --
 No. I -- I realize that, but the problem is you've got a Due Process Clause that talks about persons not citizens. Maybe I can understand the -- the fiction that says it doesn't apply to these persons if, for practical purposes, we stop them at the border and we don't let them into society. Once we do let them into society, whether we say it's subject to this condition it can be revoked or not, I find it difficult to see a constitutional warrant for drawing the line that you want us to draw.
 This Court has always treated as the same the custody of an alien who arrives at the border and has not been admitted, whether that person stays on the boat, goes to Ellis Island, which the Court said was not an entry that gave somebody constitutional rights to come here. In the Kaplan v. Tod case, you had the example of a person who was paroled for 9 years and regarded as not being in the United States. And what the --
 You're giving me prior examples, but the issue here is should we continue to respect that -- what has been called that fiction as to people who are allowed into the country and are allowed to move around like other aliens and, indeed, and by and large like citizens.
 With respect, I think it is not -- it is not a fiction with respect to the constitutional issue because there's a critical difference between, for example, a lawful permanent resident -- a person does not acquire lawful permanent resident status by something like adverse possession, by living in the United States for a long period of time. It is an affirmative grant of status for permission to reside permanently in the United States. It is a grant of a status --
 Which can be revoked. Which can be revoked, and that's the -- the distinction that seems to me strange. When somebody commits a deportable offense, they are stripped of whatever right they had to be here. They are, it seems to me, in the same boat as someone who is excludable. They -- they do -- do not have any right to remain no more than a parolee has. We have taken away their right to remain. So it seems to me that they have no status anymore based on a prior admission that we have removed from them.
 This Court -- this Court thought otherwise in -- in Zadvydas 3 years ago where it drew a distinction. It said the distinction between someone who has never entered the country and someone who has effected an entry --
 That's true. That's true. Absolutely we did. And also, I'll assume for argument's sake that you're completely right on the constitutional point. That's just for argument's sake. But assume you are. So there's all kinds of constitutional difference. Still, I don't see how to read the statute one way for one group of people and another way for another. The statutory words in Zadvydas, the words that the Attorney General may detain this individual beyond the removal period, are read in Zadvydas to mean beyond the removal period -- may detain beyond the removal period means for a reasonable time, presumably 6 months, presumptively, related -- reasonable time related to the purpose of the statute which is to find a country willing to accept them. Okay? Now, I haven't found a single case of this Court where you interpret these complicated words one way for one and another way for another. My law clerk found a couple of cases, Communications Work v. Bett and Machinists v. Street, where in Bett particularly the Court strongly implies the contrary. It says you can't read words differently just because we interpreted in one -- you know, one statute, they were interpreted in light of constitutional considerations, and now we have -- those constitutional considerations aren't here, but it's the same words. You have to apply it the same.
 But -- but, with respect, the Court did not construe any word in this statute to impose the limitation that you're describing. The -- the way the Court posed the question was does it -- does it affirmatively grant a power for detention of these aliens in these circumstances. At the very beginning of the Court's opinion, the Court put to one side --
 That's an interpretation.
 Pardon me?
 It says -- that's an interpretation.
 But -- but --
 It says the statute does not confer power to hold beyond a reasonable period.
 But -- but the -- the mode of analysis of the Court -- it starts with the introduction to the Court's opinion, and this is at page 682. It says -- of -- of Zadvydas. We deal here with aliens who are admitted, aliens who have not yet --
 Yes, yes. That's right.
 No. But -- but that -- that's setting the Court -- the case up. But then what the Court says, in terms of how it interprets the statute, we construe the statute to contain an implicit reasonable time limitation, the application of which is subject to Federal court review. Well, what is a reasonable time depends upon the circumstances.
 Well -- well, yes, but what -- what -- we put in the presumptively 6 months, but we said in our view the statute, read in light of the Constitution's demands, limits an alien's post-removal period detention to a period reasonably necessary to bring about that alien's removal from the United States. It does not permit indefinite detention interpreting it to avoid constitutional threat. We include that once removal is no longer reasonably foreseeable, continued detention is no longer authorized by statute. Now, I don't know what those sentences are doing unless they're interpreting the words I mentioned. And then later in the opinion, we say it's presumptively --
 No. What -- what --
 -- not always, but presumptively 6 months.
 What -- what the -- what the Court was doing was -- the -- the standard that the Court announced at the beginning of its opinion was a reasonable -- a reasonable time limitation, the application of which is subject to court review. As applied to permanent resident aliens, the Court saw a -- a constitutional problem and, in that situation, came up with a presumptive 6-month rule.
 Well, it interpreted the statute as doing it. Now, that brings me back to the original question.
 No. No, I don't believe -- with -- with respect, what -- what I believe the Court said was that there is a reasonable time limitation. And given the -- given the distinction that runs throughout immigration laws, this Court said at page 2500 of the Supreme Court Reports in this decision, the distinction between aliens who arrive at our borders and are governed by Mezei, as opposed to people who enter, runs throughout our immigration law, I would think that it would run throughout 1231(a)(6).
 All right. I can -- I can agree with you that the different classes are going to implicate different considerations on what is reasonable. But you, as I understand it, go the further step and say there is a presumption, and perhaps an irrebuttable presumption, that in the case of the -- the legally excluded, even though they are, in fact, in the country, the -- the presumptive reasonable period is forever.
 Well --
 And that's where -- it's that stretch that's giving us the trouble.
 And -- first of all, the Court doesn't have to decide that in this case because we have a regime where each of the aliens before this Court, came here, was paroled --
 That's true, but we've got to say something.
 But if -- if I may go to the Mezei case, what the Court said there is that the detention of the alien on Ellis Island was effectuating his exclusion. The two cannot be distinguished from one another.
 Well, Mr. Kneedler, do you mind telling us whether the record shows where Martinez and Benitez are now? Where are they?
 Benitez has been released to a half-way house. We sent the Court a letter --
 That's what I thought.
 -- last week showing that the review process under these regulations actually works. It's been working for 15 years. And as we explain in our brief, more than 9,000 people have been granted parole here.
 So is that case basically moot? Benitez's?
 He hasn't been -- he hasn't been -- I think he's still in -- in custody. Whether -- if -- if he -- if he completes that and is released, a question of mootness may arise at that point.
 Where's Martinez?
 Martinez was released pursuant to the court -- district court order almost 2 years ago, and he's -- he's now at large under an order of supervision.
 Mr. Kneedler --
 Now, if I can continue for just a moment and then I'll stop. There is a new statute, 1226(a) of title 8, part of the Patriot Act, which allows detention of aliens who threaten our safety or security. Presumably that is an option if either of these people is seen to do that.
 If -- if there's an -- if there is an individualized reason to believe that an alien would be a terrorist or -- or a threat to the security in that respect, but the threat to the --
 And that's available, is it not?
 That -- that's available, but the threat to the national security here is much larger than that. If -- again, if we go back to the immigration crises involving Haiti and Cuba, there -- there is a threat to the national security when another nation can foist aliens onto our shores, and -- and --
 May I ask you about --
 -- if the United States had no ability to -- to deflect --
 Mr. Kneedler, can I ask you a question, forgetting the statutes for a moment -- I -- which we've already covered at some length? Just going to your constitutional position, it's clear that a person who's not been admitted and has been paroled could be excluded forthwith, summarily, and so forth because he's never been admitted. But does that person have any protection under the Constitution? Could we shoot him?
 No, no, surely. What -- the -- the --
 Then what is the protection under the Constitution that deals -- is it the Due Process Clause?
 Whatever right -- in -- in a criminal prosecution the Bill of Rights would apply to that person.
 Is he -- is he a person within the meaning --
 Yes. We -- our position is not that he's -- not that he's not a person. The question is what -- is what process is due.
 And is he a person who has a right to liberty, entitled to some protection, very, very, very minimal, but there is some protection to that -- that individual.
 It -- depending upon the context. The one protection for liberty he does --
 Well, the context is he got off a boat. We couldn't -- but Cuba won't take him back or -- or whatever -- wherever he came from. They can't. And the only thing we can do to keep him out of the country is to keep him in jail.
 He has no substantive due process right to be released into the United States.
 He -- he doesn't have a right to be released. But -- but you do not contend that we could kill him.
 No, absolutely not. Absolutely not.
 He does have some -- some minimal protection under the Constitution.
 Absolutely not. The formulation -- and this was used in -- in the Court's decision in Landon v. Plasencia. The -- the question is there are no constitutional rights in connection with his admission to the United States. And admission means, I think, both formal granted admission and practical admission or entry. A person cannot --
 A person who runs in illegally, a person who crosses the border illegally, say, from Mexico is entitled to these rights when you catch him.
 He's entitled to procedural due process rights. We don't believe he -- that person has any more substantive due process right to remain at large in the United States.
 But you -- you -- I thought there was a reg of the INS.
 No. With -- with --
 Am I not right?
 With -- with respect to the --
 Tell me if I'm right.
 With respect to the regulations, but --
 Can I say what it is?
 Yes, I'm sorry.
 I thought there was a reg -- to be sure we're talking about the same thing -- where the INS has said that Zadvydas applies to individuals who run into the United States illegally from Mexico. Am I right about that?
 The -- the INS has -- or now DHS has applied it. I -- I don't know that there's an analysis in there that says Zadvydas requires it. I don't think the -- either the statute or particularly the Constitution would give somebody who sneaks across our border a right to remain here, a substantive due process right to be here. Maybe procedural rights would be different, but a substantive --
 But is that the current INS --
 Mr. Kneedler, may I -- may I try to get in the question I did earlier? Is -- is 8 U.S.C., section 1182(d)(5) -- was -- was that applicable in Zadvydas, as it's applicable here?
 No, because those were lawful permanent residents whose -- whose lawful permanent residency had -- had -- they came in under a grant of lawful permanent residency.
 So this is a new string to your bow in this case.
 Yes, because these aliens entered the United States only --
 But it wouldn't -- it wouldn't apply to the illegal alien because it's a statute that governs parole and they're not paroled into the United States.
 But someone -- someone who would be picked up would be an applicant for admission and could be released under this -- under this statute. But -- but focusing here on the people excluded at the border --
 How does that --
 -- this is the only way someone could --
 How does that make that person, the illegal entrant, a parolee?
 He would be an applicant for admission, and the -- I -- I believe -- I believe I'm correct on that.
 Suppose he says, I don't want to apply for admission. I just don't want to be locked up.
 The act treats him as an applicant for admission under 1225(a)(1). Mr. Chief Justice, if I may
 Very well, Mr. Kneedler. Ms. Dahl, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: Because the same words mean the same thing in the same statute, this Court need not reach the constitutional questions presented by the indefinite detention of inadmissible as opposed to deportable aliens. Without going to questions of constitutional doubt, there are three reasons why this Court should hold that section 1231(a)(6) treats inadmissible aliens the same as it treats deportable aliens.
 Before you get to that, do you think that that's the only statute applicable here? What about 1182(d)(5)? What's your response to the Government's assertion that that's an independent basis?
 Justice Scalia, I don't believe it provides an independent basis for detention. The immigration law works together in it's various elements, and section 1182, when parole is revoked, treats the alien then as an applicant for admission, and section 1229 places the applicant for admission into removal proceedings. The Government did not obtain a ruling on that argument from the Ninth Circuit, although it made reference to 1182 in its motions to stay the briefing schedule. It ultimately conceded that this case was controlled by Lin Guo Xi, which was a statutory construction of 1231(a)(6), and cert was granted on the 1231(a)(6) issue only. The reading of the statute that we proffer, that the same words mean the same meaning, is consistent with the overall changes Congress made in 1996 in IIRIRA when it eliminated the category of excludable aliens and replaced it with a single, broader category, now called removable aliens, that embraces both inadmissible and deportable aliens. Third, Congress knows how to provide for indefinite detention when it wants to.
 Well, how do you explain then, Ms. Dahl, the language in the Court's Zadvydas opinion that had, were we dealing with, in effect, off-shore aliens, this would be a much different case?
 I believe it would present a different question, but the constitutional issues presented by indefinite detention remain. The Court doesn't need to reach those --
 So you say that a person, even though they're not lawfully admitted into the United States, still couldn't be indefinitely detained.
 Yes, Your Honor, that is our -- our point precisely. The Government was not correct when it said that it -- that this Court has always treated excludable aliens the same. In a case that was a contemporary of the Mezei decision, Kwong Hai Chew, cited at page 45 of our brief, the Court found that an excludable entrant on Ellis Island was entitled to --
 Well, the Government distinguishes that case. What do you make of their distinction?
 We disagree. I think that it shows that the Court will consider length of time in the country in determining what amount of due process is required. Now, the plain language of the statute of 1231(a)(6) requires the same treatment between inadmissible and deportable aliens. Where there's no difference in the language that Congress has used, this Court can draw no distinctions. There is a presumption that Congress expects its statutes to be read in the same manner as the Supreme Court's interpretation, and because of the interrelationship between the parole statute and the revocation proceedings and removability proceedings, there's no reason for this Court to resort to the 1182 statute to provide the authority that the Government seeks. The relevant authority is section 1231(a)(6).
 Well, what do you think we should do with the 1182? Because suppose you prevail on your argument that it's the same statute, the same word, it can't be construed differently under 12-whatever, and the Government says fine. We now go to the other string in our bow and we continue to detain this person on the basis of 1182(d)(5)(A).
 Well, the 1182(d)(5)(A) doesn't provide for indefinite detention. What it provides is that upon revocation of parole, the alien is placed into removal proceedings. Once the removal proceedings have been determined and a final order of removal is entered, 1231(a) requires removal within 90 days, and failing that, the appropriate -- the relevant statutory provision is 1231(a)(6). That says that the alien may be detained beyond the removal period and then, if released, subjected to conditions of supervision. 1231 is the only statutory authority for post-removal period detention. Parole deals with entry and 1231(a)(6) --
 Well, but you haven't answered, I think, the question of whether the Government is entitled in this case, if we dispose of the 1231 question, to resort to the other statute.
 I don't think that the Court could carve out a statute and use it in a way contrary to the way it functions in the immigration scheme and make superfluous or irrelevant a more express, more detailed statutory provision.
 Well, what you're saying is that even if 1182 comes first, 1231 comes second.
 Precisely, Your Honor. And I don't think that the Government could revoke parole and then suspend proceedings to determine the admissibility of a parolee indefinitely.
 But still, is this another -- could -- could we do this? I noticed that -- that your -- the petition for cert in Benitez has two questions, both of which are about interpreting 1231(a)(6). The Government's petition, though not its brief -- the Government's petition in Crawford says the question presented is whether 1231(a)(6) in Zadvydas compelled a release. So this other -- this other matter is a totally -- seen as a totally separate ground. Perhaps the thing to do is we send it back, and if they want to raise it, they can raise it, and it would be up to the circuit to decide whether they had preserved it or not preserved it. Is that -- is that a sensible thing?
 I don't think so because I don't think that 1182 allows the interpretation that the Government --
 And that's your view of -- of what 1182 means, and they're going to have a different view. If they want to argue their different view, they could do it in the Ninth Circuit. If they've waived it, they've waived it, and that's up to them, not up to us.
 What the Ninth Circuit found, though, in questions of an inadmissible alien, that this Court's construction of 1231(a)(6) in Zadvydas applied and there would be no need for resort to any other statute.
 May I ask if you believe the supervision after the 90-day period covered in subparagraph 3 -- is there -- can that continue indefinitely in your view?
 Yes. While the alien is awaiting removal, he is subject to supervision conditions that will safeguard the Government's interests, and for as long as he is waiting, he is under supervision. It's those supervision conditions that distinguish this case from the situation where the Government is finding national security risks. That -- Congress has expressly provided for the indefinite detention of people whom the Attorney General certifies as presenting risks to national security. It's also the presence of a national security risk that distinguishes this case from the Mezei decision. I think that the Government makes more of that decision than needs to be made in order to find that Mr. Benitez and Mr. Martinez are in different situations. They were allowed into this country. They have lived here for 24 years, and --
 How long had the -- the detainee in, however you pronounce it, Mezei lived in the United States?
 Mr. Mezei had been in the United States for 25 years before he left, and he was gone for an extended period of time. When he sought to return, he was treated as if he were an initial entrant, and the Government, citing national security, excluded him without a hearing and refused to disclose the evidence that was the basis for the exclusion. He challenged that and wanted a hearing and wanted the Attorney General to be required to disclose the evidence. The Court found that his release into the community itself would present a security risk and therefore sustained the denial of the hearing and the detention of Mr. Mezei.
 Well, I don't think it really said they -- they found there was a security risk. They -- they held the Government did not have to explain because the man had no right to come in.
 That's correct.
 What's -- what's your best answer to the Government's argument that unless you treat this case differently from Zadvydas, at least for purposes of reasonable time or reasonable interest, which affects time, the United States is basically defenseless against countries that -- that want to dump undesirable aliens and force them into the United States?
 I don't think that applying the statute, as it's written, leaves the Government defenseless.
 Because.
 Congress can pass another statute, if it needs to, and the Government --
 But it's defenseless under the present law?
 I disagree. We have --
 Then what is the defense?
 We have very effective means of interdicting --
 What are they?
 Well, after the Mariel boatlift, the Government changed its policy and now intercepts people who are coming from Cuba by boat and detains them at Guantanamo Bay, does a screening, and has a more effective repatriation process for people that they do not want to come in.
 You want us to take --
 So you're saying they can actually exclude, in practical terms.
 Yes. That's exactly what --
 You want us to take judicial notice that the Mexican border and American border is impervious? (Laughter.)
 I think that would present a different question. As the Government acknowledged, people who come into the country without inspection are entitled, under the Government regulations, to the protections under Zadvydas. And --
 And there's no -- and -- and there's no answer to Justice Souter's question with regard to people who -- who -- once they enter that way. Right?
 Well, the Government has --
 Except a new statute.
 Well, Congress has -- has, by definition, treated those people as inadmissible aliens who are subject to removal proceedings. And the interdiction methods are -- they're purely political decisions that the Government needs to make.
 But they -- in any case, those individuals are not the subject of sort of dumping action by their own governments.
 That's correct, Your Honor.
 Does the -- Congress has passed a special statute with respect to terrorism, hasn't it, where it does authorize detention of any of these people who are engaged in terrorism. Now, I don't know how that's defined. Is that defined to relieve in a way that's broad enough to relieve some of the problem?
 Well, if -- well, first of all, the Government has the ability to detain, pending the removal proceedings, of people who are trying to come into the country. The question becomes if they can't be repatriated. Now, the Patriot Act in 1226(a) does allow, in instances of national security, for the Attorney General to indefinitely detain. Now, importantly, that statute provides for procedural protections and judicial review, that is absent from --
 But are -- are the people here charged with any sort of terrorist activities? They were committed -- convicted of crimes, but I -- I didn't think they were connected with terrorist activities.
 That's correct. The Government has not made any allegation that there's --
 Just normal, harmless criminals.
 Yes.
 Right? (Laughter.)
 Their release from prison presents the same issues that the release of any person who has served the sentences that were imposed after the commission of a crime.
 Well, except that with aliens, they can be deported, whereas a citizen can't be, upon release from prison.
 That's correct. And the conditions of supervision that the Government can impose are much lengthier and could be even more onerous than the kinds of supervision conditions after prison that the Government could impose on its citizens. In this case, Mr. Martinez and Mr. Zadvydas both received permission to live here. Both committed crimes. Both served their sentences and both were ordered removed. Nothing in section 1231(a)(6) warrants making Mr. Martinez wait for removal in a Federal prison perhaps for the rest of his life, while Mr. Zadvydas awaits removal after having been released --
 I thought the other person was named Benitez. I thought we had Zadvydas in the other case. Do we have two, a Martinez and a Benitez, here?
 Yes, Your Honor. I was drawing a comparison between the situation with Mr. Zadvydas and Mr. Martinez. Detention, of course, needs to be reasonably related to its purpose. Here removal cannot be achieved. So detention for that purpose becomes arbitrary and punitive, and we'd ask the Court to affirm the grant of habeas corpus and Mr. Martinez's release on supervision conditions.
 Thank you, Ms. Dahl. Mr. Mills, we'll hear from you.
 Mr. Chief Justice, and may it please the Court: I think that we have lost sight of the statutory scheme that applies here. Section 1182(d)(5)(A) is not a detention statute. It's clearly not preserved as an initial matter. It was not in the answer to either habeas petition. The justification given in the district court in both cases was 1231(a)(6). But, Justice Breyer, there is no need to remand this case because a clear, simple reading of the immigration statutes demonstrates that 1182 is not a detention statute. You have to go through the process, and I attempted to do this in my reply brief, but I think I can do it a little bit more clearly for the Court this morning. When an alien first arrives, he's an applicant for admission. Section 1225(b)(2)(A) of title 8, United States Code says an applicant for admission -- any applicant for admission shall be detained until the removal proceeding unless it is clear, beyond any doubt, that they are entitled to come in. So all aliens, when they apply -- that's the detention statute that initially applies, 1225(b)(2)(A). They are to be detained until there is a removal proceeding. The removal proceeding, which is governed by 1229(a)(1) -- I'm sorry -- 1226(a) -- it is 1229(a) -- is to determine whether the alien is admissible or not, whether they should come in or whether they must be removed. So 1225(b)(2)(A) says detain until that point. 1182(d)(5)(A) then comes in to authorize the Government to stop that process for humanitarian reasons and parole an alien in. We won't have the removal process. We're going to -- we -- we're going to get out of the detention in 1225(b)(2)(A), and we're going to let you out on parole, which is discretionary. That's 1182(d)(5)(A). If at any time, we in our discretion think it is no longer appropriate to keep you on parole, we can revoke that parole, and the statute 1182(d)(5)(A) says once parole is revoked, the alien is treated as, quote, any other applicant for admission. So you go back to 1225(b)(2)(A), which says detain them until the removal proceeding.
 Well, you -- you skipped a -- a phrase. It says when the Attorney General is of the opinion that the purposes of the parole justify nothing more, the individual shall return or be returned to the custody from which he began. And their argument is that custody is different in these cases.
 That custody is the custody under 1225(b)(2)(A). That is the statute that authorizes the custody. That's what they're being returned to. 1225(b)(2)(A) is detention until the removal proceedings. And in the Demore v. Kim case, this case -- this Court said that even if it's a long time and there aren't other procedures in place, you can be detained until your removal order is entered because -- and -- and the emphasis was there's an end date to that. So there's an end date to detention under (b)(2)(A), 1225(b)(2)(A), and it's the removal proceedings. Section 1231 is the statute that governs removal and says, okay, now what happens? It says you have to remove within 90 days, but for certain aliens who've committed crimes or are inadmissible or are otherwise determined to be dangerous, we can detain them beyond. It says may be detained beyond the period. That is the only statute that authorizes any detention of an alien after a removal order other than the specific terrorist statute, 1226(a), which was enacted, which does not authorize indefinite detention. It says -- it has a paragraph labeled indefinite detention, and it says the Government shall not indefinitely detain a terrorist alien that it cannot remove except that if the Government determines -- and -- and it appears to put the burden on the Government -- that the person is a danger to national security or the community, it can detain them for another 6 months. And then you -- you could have indefinite detention, but each time, each 6 months, the statute provides for review. So not only do the sneakers, the aliens who cross across the border in the -- in the dark of night from Mexico or wherever -- not only do they under the Government's own admission have the Zadvydas rights, so too do terrorist aliens by statute. And to suggest that by some implication Congress has intended to authorize the indefinite detention of people that we thought we should welcome into our country, even though we didn't have the ability under our quota system and under our current regulations in 1980 to let them in, somehow they have no rights against indefinite detention. For the Government to --
 How do you -- how do you answer the Government's argument that this is necessary, that the United States shouldn't effectively be punished for being humanitarian, and if we can't hold these people, if we're forced to let them in, then any rogue nation can dump anyone it wants on the United States and we can't stop it?
 Yes, Your Honor. Justice Ginsburg, that's their sole policy argument, and frankly, it doesn't hold water. Just yesterday in the Jama case, the Government took the position that if Mexico flooded -- flooded our borders with illegal aliens who we could not detain, we know under their own regulations, if they snuck in, we couldn't detain them, but if a new Mexican -- there was a Mexican dictator and he flooded our borders, could we forcibly repatriate them? And the Government said absolutely we can. We can go down and put them back in Mexico. We could do that with the Cubans. We could let them out the gate at Guantanamo Bay. If a -- a rogue nation truly invades our country with its bad aliens, that is an infringement on our sovereignty, and I think that's an act of war. And I think the President has all kinds of options: trade sanctions, go to the United Nations, diplomacy. If it's really something bad that's going to be a -- a threat to our national security, I think --
 Well, you -- you might wait a while if you went to the United Nations or -- (Laughter.)
 -- or to -- I take it the Government feels you need some sort of a rather immediate recourse.
 Sure, and our Government has demonstrated that it believes in preemptive -- preemptive action and we can go in and have regime change in Cuba if it -- if it is such a threat. If it's a political decision, the purely executive decision, that our national security is so threatened, they have all kinds of tools.
 But this -- this regime is not sending, you know, an armed flotilla to Florida. They just -- (Laughter.)
 -- they just open their jails and say, hey, you know, go wherever you want. And these people say I want to get out of here, and they go to Florida. You -- you want us --
 That was less than 1 percent --
 -- to bomb Cuba because of that.
 That was less than 1 percent of the Cubans who came in the Mariel boatlift. That did occur, and we do have options for dealing with them. We can return them forcibly. If they don't allow us, that's like them sending a missile. It's -- we -- we can destroy the missile. We can't destroy a human being. By punishing a human being that Castro sends over, we're not sending a message to Castro. We're not saying, ah, you sent your prisoners over here and were going to indefinitely detain them. Mental torture. That will teach you. That's --
 What you -- what you mean when you say we can forcibly return them is literally we can take them to Guantanamo, take them to the gate, and push them out?
 That's one option. If there -- if the Cuban army is there to prevent us, you know, maybe it would require some military action that the administration might decide is not advisable. But those are the options depending on the size of the threat. So a judicial interpretation that the statute means the same thing in all contexts does not deprive the Government of anything. And I'd like to go back to that if I could.
 I thought -- maybe I -- I misunderstood you, but I thought that one of your points were even assuming that we couldn't send these people back into Cuba without having a major conflagration, the rogue dictator is not going to be deterred by our tossing even into the sea the people that he doesn't want.
 That -- that is my point. That's the point that I -- I intend to make, that indefinitely detaining these people -- that does nothing to a dictator. That does nothing to deter a dictator. All it means is we're going to be incurring the huge cost of incarcerating a large number of people, and if anything, that may encourage the dictator to do exactly that, or it may encourage the dictator, instead of sending them to Key West on boats -- on American boats, to sneak them up on speed boats or take them through Mexico and sneak them across the border that's --
 Anyway, it's a little drastic. I -- I guess that before this happens, Congress might enact a statute like the terrorist statute.
 Exactly. That -- that is exactly correct, Justice Breyer. And if they think -- whether a -- a Cuban, a Mariel Cuban, can be put in jail -- and these are in prison for the rest of their life -- is a huge policy decision. And this Court should abstain from putting its voice as -- on to the answer. That is a decision for Congress in the first place. In Zadvydas, this Court said the statute doesn't clearly do that, so we're not going to -- we're not going to answer that question as to whether it would be constitutional.
 Well, it's a policy decision either way. I -- I suppose if Zadvydas had come out the other way, the Congress could have responded as well.
 That's correct. But in -- in this case, because especially the Zadvydas aliens had clear constitutional rights, we avoid the question. The doctrine of constitutional avoidance says the Court doesn't engage in that. The default is to stay away from it. If Congress wants to do something that might be unconstitutional, they can come back and do it and then the Court will determine whether it's unconstitutional. Back to the point of whether 1231(a)(6) can mean something different for the two groups of aliens. Never before has this Court taken a statute that --
 How do you explain, Mr. Mills, the language that the Court used, pointing out how different this kind of a case would have been from the -- from the Zadvydas case?
 Sure. My reading of that -- of that decision, there were two parts of the decision. There was part one, which examined whether there is a -- or it determined whether the statute is ambiguous, and part two is whether there's a constitutional error. It was only in the part of the decision deciding whether there's a constitutional problem that the distinction was made. The distinction makes the difference in whether there's a problem or not. And maybe there's not a problem for inadmissible aliens. So, the Court then concluded in Zadvydas that because there's a problem, we look at the statute. This statute could be interpreted to authorize indefinite detention or not. It's ambiguous. Because we have a problem, at least with one category, we're going to choose the -- a safe route.
 It might have been a -- a means of warning Congress off one area, but not the other. That is to say, just because we think there's a constitutional doubt here and therefore Congress might be sailing close to the wind if they tried to overrule our opinion by statute doesn't mean that Congress couldn't in this other area alter the result in Zadvydas.
 I think that that is absolutely a -- a conclusion that can be drawn that Congress --
 Of course, I dissented in that case. So I'm not saying this was a good idea. (Laughter.)
 But it -- it's interesting. In -- in just my -- for my -- my own information, then Congress did respond. And there were two areas in Zadvydas that, you know, didn't warn Congress off. One is the one we're talking about now. The other is terrorism. And Congress responded in the terrorism matter. Is that right? But they didn't do anything on the --
 That's absolutely correct. And they're responding right now. In the 9/11 Commission bill, there is a section that's being negotiated as to whether terrorist aliens who can't be removed because they would be tortured -- whether they can be indefinitely detained. And they're looking at the same limiting language. One point that I'd like to make that I did not get to make directly in the brief, but it was raised. Justice Scalia, you had a question yesterday in the Leocal case, and it -- it raised an issue that I hadn't looked at before on whether a statute can be interpreted differently in a situation where the reason to interpret it is no longer there. And that's the rule of lenity cases. And I cited as a supplemental authority the United States v. Thompson/Center Arms Company, 504 U.S. 505. It's a 1992 decision, and it involved a tax code provision. And the question is, do we apply the rule of lenity? And Justice Stevens, in dissent you said no, because this is a civil case. The rule of lenity doesn't apply. But a three-judge plurality, an opinion by Justice Souter, and a two-justice -- two-judge concurrence by Justice Scalia both agreed that the rule of lenity applied because the statute applies both in criminal and civil contexts. And you can't have one meaning in a criminal context and another in civil. For the same reason, the rule of constitutional avoidance should not result in a statute being interpreted one way when there would be a doubt and another way when there would not.
 Well, what about the argument that the statute, in effect, limits the -- our -- our interpretation limits the -- the detention to a period reasonably related to the Government's interest in accomplishing that interest? That interest is different in -- in the case of -- of aliens who are excluded, if we accept that class as distinct from all excludables. And -- and that may allow a much longer period of detention, among other things, to deter dictators from -- from dumping. You've given us an answer to what to do if they dump, but we don't want them to dump in the first place. That argument stops short of saying we can detain them for life, but it would support the -- the position that on a consistent interpretation of the statute, the Government could detain them longer in the excluded cases than in others. What's your answer to that?
 My answer to that is that that might be a -- a legislative policy decision to make that distinction. But in 1996, IIRIRA abolished the distinction between inadmissible and deportable aliens after they've been ordered removed. Up until that time, it makes a difference. It makes a difference under the Constitution. But once they've been ordered removed -- and this was the Government's argument in Zadvydas. Once they've been ordered removed, regardless of how they got here in the first place, they no longer have any right to be here at all and --
 There is only one class of excludables by the Government's own choice. That's -- that's basically your answer.
 After a removal proceeding, there is only one class. That is correct.
 Yes.
 If there are no more questions, I would just ask that the Court reverse in this case. If there are any mootness concerns about Mr. Benitez, I would refer the Court to Friends of the Environment which said that when a challenged practice has stopped voluntarily, that does not moot a case out in the Supreme Court unless there's some reason to believe they won't go at it again. And the Government has asserted that it can revoke his release at any time for any reason and detain him indefinitely. And the suggestion that the fact that he's been released under the Cuban Review Panel shows that his -- he's been protected is -- is not well taken. He was determined, when he first was detained in -- in 2001, that he was eligible under the Cuban Review Panel to be released. It took 3 years and the week before this case was argued in the highest court of the land before the Immigration Service did what its own regulations told it it had to do. Thank you very much.
 Thank you, Mr. Mills. Mr. Kneedler, you have 4 minutes remaining.
 Thank you, Mr. Chief Justice. Justice Souter, you're exactly right in terms of why the statutory construction or statutory application of the terms in Zadvydas does not control here. The Court's starting point -- again back to page 682 of its opinion, it says, we deal here with aliens who were admitted. The way the Court dealt in the opinion was a matter of statutory construction, and it did it by reading into the statute a reasonable time limitation. What is reasonable for aliens who -- who have been admitted and are subject to what were called deportation is different from aliens who were stopped at the border. And in fact, in the -- in the Court's statutory analysis, it looked to the point that in the Witkovitz jurisdictional statement referring to Congress' constitutional doubts about detention of more than 6 months, those were constitutional doubts about people who were being deported after having been allowed to be here. There has never --
 What's your -- what's your answer to Mr. -- Mr. Mills' position that the Government has, in fact, statutorily waived that distinction by creating one class of excludables?
 It -- with respect -- with respect, it has not. And -- and if I could -- if I could explain this. This -- going back to Mezei, this Court held and in fact rejected a very similar argument. The rationale of the court of appeals in Mezei was that deportable aliens are subject to an express, not an implied, 6-month limitation. And the court of appeals said the aliens in that -- the alien in that case, once he couldn't be removed to another country, should be released because the purpose of keeping him to return him to another country was no longer being served. This Court rejected that argument, even though there was a statutory express limitation of 6 months for deportable aliens, held that an alien who had been on Ellis Island for 2 years did not have to be released. In reliance on that decision, Congress passed the parole statute to leave the release in -- excuse me -- Mezei was after it, but the -- the executive branch has relied on that rationale. The Cuban review regulations that are at issue here have been in place for 15 years under the parole statute. As Congress well knew, when it acted in 1996, the -- this program was the subject of many hearings in Congress. There were cases -- the Barrera case out of the Ninth Circuit sustained a 10-year detention of a Mariel Cuban. It is implausible to believe in 1996, when Congress enacted IIRIRA, that it intended to cut back on the longstanding power of the executive branch to prevent hordes of aliens from coming into our country and to impose an arbitrary 6-month limitation. I -- I think there's no argument that if an alien is detained before removal proceedings are begun, that there is no 6-month limitation. His release is entirely up to the Attorney General under the parole regulations. It's -- it's implausible to believe that once Congress actually enters a formal order of exclusion or now removal against an alien, the person is no longer in an ambiguous situation, the executive branch says you're not eligible, that suddenly that person who has been formerly found not eligible, would be subject to a 6 month limitation that did not apply up until '96 and doesn't even apply until these -- to these aliens until removal proceedings have been begun. So the right way to look at this statute as what's a reasonable time under 1231(a)(6) has to take into account that historic background of the United States being able to protect its borders. And there is no indication whatsoever that Congress intended to overrule this longstanding program for Mariel Cubans, which has operated, as I said, for 15 years.
 Thank you, Mr. Kneedler. The case is submitted.
 We'll hear argument in two cases, the Commissioner of Revenue -- Internal Revenue against Banks and the Commissioner against Banaitis. Mr. Salmons.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Section 61(a) of the Internal Revenue Code defines gross income to include all income from whatever source derived. As this Court has held, that definition is sweeping and represents an intent by Congress to exert the full measure of its taxing power. The court of appeals decisions below, by excluding from respondent's gross income the portion of litigation proceeds paid to their attorneys under contingent fee agreements, is inconsistent with two longstanding Federal tax law principles for defining gross income.
 Now, if -- if this didn't involve the alternative minimum tax, would the amount be deductible?
 Your Honor, but for the alternative minimum tax, there would be an -- a miscellaneous itemized deduction --
 -- under section 212 of the code --
 -- that would be subject to the limit of the 2 percent of adjusted gross income that applies to itemized deductions. But section 56(b)(1)(A) --
 That's of annual income. Right? 2 percent of -- of the person's annual income?
 Of the adjusted gross income.
 For the year.
 For the year. That's correct, Your Honor.
 But, gee, in the case of a -- of a major award, that 2 percent is very likely to be exceeded, isn't it?
 It -- it certainly may, Your Honor.
 So this is a problem that's going to exist even -- even after the alternate minimum tax is abolished. Right? (Laughter.)
 I'm not sure entirely what you're referring to as the problem, but it is the case that -- that --
 Well, you don't think -- the Government doesn't think it's a problem. I'm talking about taking a huge percentage of the -- of the person's recovery. That -- that will happen even -- even in the case where there's no minimum tax -- alternative.
 That is correct. That -- that is correct, Your Honor. Now, I mean -- and let me make two points about that. The first is that as a -- as a general matter, the tax code defines gross income expansively, and there's a number of this Court's cases that make that clear. Then -- then the question becomes are there deductions provided that allow for certain expenses to be deducted.
 Don't some States such as Oregon require a plaintiff to remit a portion of punitive damages recovered to the State so they don't even go to the taxpayer? But is the taxpayer saddled with that too?
 Your Honor, I would think the answer to that question is no. It's not a question that I have examined in depth in -- in this case because it's not presented, but as a general matter --
 Well, what about attorney's fees in class actions? As I understand it, those are not regarded by the Government as attributable all to the taxpayer.
 Your Honor --
 A plaintiff who's part of a class in a class action suit where attorney's fees are paid.
 Your Honor, we believe that the same principles would apply to class action lawsuits as to other lawsuits in terms of the taxation of litigation proceeds. It may very well be the case in a number of class action contexts that when applying those principles, the proper -- the proper analysis leads to the conclusion that the taxpayer doesn't exert sufficient control and that the payment of attorney's fees is not in response to a debt owed by the taxpayer. And so there might be a different result.
 Well, I -- I thought we were -- our attention was pointed to a number of instances where the Internal Revenue Service did not require the taxpayer to show all the attorney's fees as income in those class action situations.
 Your Honor, that is correct.
 Yes.
 I want to be clear. We think the same principles apply across the board to defining gross income. In applying that in a number of class action contexts, the proper answer may be that it's not included in gross income because there wasn't sufficient control and because it wasn't paid in -- in lieu of a debt owed by the taxpayer. But here --
 Why -- why isn't there as much control in each case? I mean, the -- somebody goes to a lawyer with a claim and says, press the claim for me, recover if you can. What's the difference in -- in terms of control? So that if you win this case, why doesn't it apply to class action?
 Again, the principles would apply and there may very well be class actions --
 Yes, and I -- I want to know why the result would be different.
 Again, I'm -- I'm trying to be as specific as I can. There may be situations in which, even in the class action context, there's a fee agreement between the -- the class member and the lawyer so that the payment of attorney's fees is in satisfaction of a debt owed by the class member, and in that situation we think that it would be --
 Why -- why would -- why would that analysis appear? Certainly there's -- there's not going to be any fee paid in the -- in the paradigm example of the class action without a recovery.
 That's correct, Your Honor. There -- there are situations --
 So we're in the -- so we're in the situation we're in right now, aren't we?
 We are in the situation in which there's a need to apply the general principles for defining gross income.
 All right. But let me just -- I'll just press the point one more time. I don't understand, based on what you've said, why the class action result would be different from the result that you're arguing for here if you win this case.
 And -- and what I'm trying to point out, Your Honor, is that there may very well be class actions where it's not different. There may be some when -- where it is if it's the case that there's no contractual obligations to pay the fee -- pay the fee between the class member and the attorney, and if it's the case that the class member really exerts no meaningful control over the -- over the attorney's fees portion --
 I thought the class action distinction that the commissioner had was between opt in and opt out.
 That is certainly one of the factors that -- that the commissioner has looked to in those class --
 So if you opt in, then you did exercise control. So all the money is yours. But if you opt out, you didn't have control over the suit because you didn't opt out. I mean, you just were lethargic.
 Again, those are all facts --
 That's the basic thing. I mean, I'm trying to understand what the principle is for the reason that it's pretty hard for me to reconcile the commissioner's view in the class action case with the punitive damage case because there the person has control over the lawsuit. So why doesn't all the punitive damage, attorney's fees that come out of that, and so forth belong to -- in other words, it sounds to me, as I read this, something of a mess, and I'd like to know what the clear principle is.
 Yes, Your Honor. And -- and just to be clear, I -- I don't think the commissioner has ever taken the position that all class actions don't present the -- the possibility of the attorney's fees portion of the award being included in -- in the class member's gross income. Now, there are real enforcement issues, as a practical matter, to trying to -- to trying to implement that. You can imagine a number of class actions --
 When you say the class member, do you -- you mean the named representative. The class may include thousands of people, but it would be income to the named representative? Is that --
 Well, presumably, Your Honor, that -- only the portion of the attorney's fees that would be attributable to the -- the named representative's recovery would be included in the named representative's gross income. I don't think that the named representative would be on the hook, if you will, for all of the attorney's fees that would relate to other class members' recoveries. But I think what all this points out is that --
 Well, then -- then would it be -- would the income then go to each class -- would each class member have a share of the income?
 In a number of instances, yes, Your Honor. Again, the -- the way that we think that class action cases should be resolved is the same way that -- that these issues are approached in all cases, which is to look at the type of relationship that exists between the -- the client and the attorney to see whether the payment is made in -- in response to a debt owed by the client and also to look to the degree of control that the client has over the -- the underlying source of income. And in this context, it is --
 Suppose -- suppose the same amount were paid, as was paid here, to the attorney, but it was not by way of a contingent fee, that the -- the client had committed to pay this dollar amount in a dollar amount.
 As a flat fee?
 As a flat fee. What -- what would the tax treatment of that be?
 Your Honor, I think in fact it is undisputed in -- in the -- in these cases that if the payment of attorney's fees had either been under an hourly rate arrangement or a flat fee arrangement, that the entire amount of the litigation proceeds would be included in the -- in the respondent's gross income and nothing about the contingent fee arrangements here should -- should alter that result. The respondents --
 Well, let -- let me ask you about Professor Davenport's theory. He filed a -- an amicus brief here saying that the contingency fee or the attorney's fees should be capitalized as a transaction cost increasing the basis of the property which was the claim in the lawsuit.
 Your Honor, I'm trying to recall that amicus brief. I believe that -- was that an argument, I believe, about the application of section 83 of the tax code when you have a transaction --
 Yes.
 -- in exchange for services and you provide property?
 Yes.
 We think that the better way to analyze this is that in fact there was no transfer of the underlying cause of action, and so we think that -- that we -- that gets into a very complicated area as to how you value the attorney's fees at the time.
 Well, you -- you don't need a transfer of the -- I don't understand what you mean --
 No, I don't either.
 -- a transfer of the -- the cause of action. Certainly if you buy a piece of real estate and -- and there's lawyer's business connected with it, you -- you don't -- you don't take an ordinary deduction which is subject to the alternative minimum tax for those lawyer's fees. You just say that's part of the transaction, and it goes onto the basis of your property. Right?
 I believe that's correct, Your Honor. But the point I was making --
 Why isn't -- why isn't that very similar to this? I mean, what difference does it make whether there's a -- there's a transaction here, isn't there? Isn't there a transaction?
 Well, there is an agreement to pay a fee for a service, and in that sense there is a transaction, yes.
 Yes, but a -- the service is connected to a transaction, namely the conversion of the chosen action into a money payment. You have this --
 That -- that is correct.
 -- this unformed chosen action. You're entitled to it, but there's a transaction converting it into a money payment. Now, why shouldn't you attribute to that transaction all -- which is profitable to you, all of the costs that go along with the transaction?
 Well, again, Your Honor, we think that transaction is essentially identical to numerous transactions that take place every day out in the real world where -- where taxpayers retain professional services in exchange for a commission or a percentage of the income that's generated.
 That is a problem that occurs to me. I don't know where you draw the line. And you say you can't draw a line.
 That is absolutely correct. I don't see any basis for distinguishing between --
 How does it work?
 -- the attorneys here and -- and a -- and an agent negotiating a book contract for an author or a financial analyst.
 You -- on that, that example, you gave the book contract with the author and you gave, I think, the investor. Would this problem arise in those cases or would the author get an above-the-line deduction?
 No, Your Honor. I believe that the author in those -- in that situation would receive the same deduction that prior to the enactment of section 703 of the American Jobs Creation Act where Congress just addressed in part the -- the issue raised in these cases --
 So you say the author -- that these people are all in the same --
 They would have an itemized -- excuse me -- a miscellaneous itemized deduction for the cost incurred in -- in producing income that under the alternative minimum tax would not be allowed.
 Is there any argument -- you -- you said at the outset that it has to be an itemized deduction subject to the two percent rule even if we set aside the alternative minimum tax. Is that conceded by everyone, or does somebody -- do some people say this is an ordinary and necessary expense? I know it's not your business, but it seems to me an ordinary and necessary expense to recover the -- the -- for employment discrimination, which is really part of your work. I don't know why -- is it -- does everybody agree that this is subject to the 2 percent rule?
 I will -- I will have to allow respondents to speak for themselves to that question, but as far as I'm aware, that is not in dispute in these cases or in any of the cases that have been litigated that -- that but -- that but for the alternative minimum tax, the way this would have been handled is that there would have been a miscellaneous itemized deduction under section 212 of the code for the cost incurred in producing income, and that the alternative minimum tax, along with, by the way, a large number of other perfectly valid deductions, get disallowed under the alternative minimum tax.
 I -- I can't get out of my mind in this case that the mechanics of the particular case may control. I know we need a national rule and so forth. My recollection is that in some States when there is a settlement or a judgment paid under a case where there's a contingency fee contract, the check is made out both to the attorney and to the client and is put in the attorney's client's trust account. So the client never has control over it.
 Well --
 Let's assume that that's true in most of the States.
 That -- that -- I know that were -- that was the facts, Your Honor, in the -- in the Banks case, that there was a check made out to both. In fact -- in fact, there was --
 So in a very real -- in -- in a very real sense, in a -- in the legal sense, the client just doesn't have control.
 Well, Your Honor, we disagree with that for, it seems to me, at least three reasons. The first is that at the time the client entered into the fee agreement, he certainly had control then. He had complete control over his cause of action. He was --
 Well, he -- he did or he didn't, but there was no money there. There was nothing there.
 Well, there was an entitlement to recover. Now, there might have been a dispute as to the proper amount or whether that claim was valid, but he was entitled to recover based on the injury he suffered that was cognizable at law and that gave raise to a cause of action. Now, in exchange for legal services, he promised to pay a portion of the recovery to the lawyer. That is a promise to pay a fee. That is not an assignment or any other transfer of the underlying cause of action. And it is undisputed, I think --
 Mr. Salmons, doesn't the plausibility of your argument here rest on the assumption that what the -- that the cause of action at the time the -- that the plaintiff made the agreement with the lawyer is a cause of action which has the same value as the ultimate recovery that the lawyer gets? Whereas, in fact, the cause of action at the time of the agreement with the lawyer has an inchoate value. The -- the value that is actually realized is going to depend in part on the -- on the skill and -- and the -- the gumption of the lawyer. So that the -- what I'm getting at -- and -- and going to Justice Kennedy's question, it seems to me that the value realized as opposed to the right to sue are two different figures. And I don't see realistically how the client has complete control over the value realized, which we don't even know until the lawyer has done his work and gotten the check.
 Your Honor, two responses to that question, if I may. The first is that, as a matter of law, it is the client that controls the cause of action and throughout the time period, even after they -- they enter into an -- a contingent fee agreement, it is the client that owns and controls the cause of action and he decides whether to settle. He decides whether to press forward or withdraw the case. He decides whether to fire the lawyer or not. He is a -- he controls the source of the income. Therefore --
 Even -- even the potential lawyer's fee. I mean, suppose this client has a major dental repair and he's got a risk-taking dentist, and he says, dentist, I'm going to give you a deal. I know you like to take risks. I may win big in my lawsuit, in which case you get everything; and I may lose, in which case you get nothing. The dentist says, fine, I'll take it. Can the client in that agreement with his dentist give what will be the lawyer's fee, the part that will go to the lawyer under the contingency fee agreement?
 Well, presumably, Your Honor, if he's already -- he's already promised that to the attorney, he would be in violation of his agreement with the attorney if he did so, and his attorney could sue him to recover or the dentist could sue him to recover.
 Then he doesn't have -- then he doesn't have dominion over that portion.
 Well, because he's -- he's given it away. In that sense I think -- and -- and in answering this, if I may just go back to one point that Justice Souter made and that is that I don't think it's the case that our analysis turns at all on how you value the claim, either at the time of the fee agreement or afterwards. Our analysis says at all relevant times, regardless of whether the value changed or not, the client was at all times in control of the underlying source of income, and it's just as if in Helvering v. Horst the father assigns the -- the bond coupon to his son, but he controls the underlying source of income.
 No, but the bond coupon has a certain value at the time the father assigns it.
 That's true.
 The only thing that has to be realized after the assignment of the coupon is the passage of time at which it will be payable. Here we do not have a definite value. We don't know -- there's no way to know for sure what that value will be until the lawsuit is over with. The -- the two are not comparable.
 Your Honor, that would be equally true of an assignment of a stock dividend while I retain the stock. I may not know what the dividend payment is going to be, but if I control the underlying source of income, i.e., the stock, then the transfer to someone else of the dividend doesn't alter the incident of tax, even if it's unknown. And I would point out that in Lucas v. Earl, the husband and wife in that case entered into agreement to assign to each other 50 percent of their income in 1901, long before the income tax was even instituted, and the tax years at issue in that case were 1920 and 1921. If anything, it was much more speculative and uncertain what income would have been earned 20 years later in that case, and that did not stop the Court from --
 So you're -- you're --
 -- applying this principle that --
 Can I -- can I ask you a question relating to the Davenport -- what's been referred to as the Davenport theory? I had thought that -- that the service has used the -- the transaction theory with regard to legal fees payable for a lawsuit seeking increased compensation for the condemnation of real estate where the taxpayer had objected to the amount that the condemning entity was offering and brought suit in court and with a contingent fee to the lawyer and that the service treated that as -- as part of the transaction cost. Am I wrong about that?
 Your Honor, to my knowledge, the -- the IRS has had a consistent position that the entire amount of litigation proceeds, including the amount that may be paid to a lawyer under a contingent fee agreement, even in the condemnation context, is tax -- is included in the gross income of -- of the taxpayer. And I would point Your Honor to the case out of the Federal Circuit, Baylin v. United States. That case involved a condemnation action, and the court of appeals in that case addressed the issue that's presented in these cases and concluded that it was includable in gross income.
 Maybe my recollection is wrong. I'll look again.
 And -- and I would point out, Your Honor -- and this has to do, I think, with the impact of the new legislation that's been pointed to in the supplemental briefs -- that at least six of the court of appeals cases addressing the issue presented in these cases involved claims that would not be covered under the new section 703 because they -- they don't involve claims for unlawful discrimination or -- or FCA claims or certain Medicare claims --
 But can -- can I ask you to go back for a minute? I guess the IRS -- you're seeing the lawsuit as the income-generating asset.
 That's correct, Your Honor.
 And you're looking at the control of the plaintiff, for example, over the lawsuit as something that determines whether it's his income. And he, of course, can't give away his income. But on that theory, to go back to Justice O'Connor's original question, then the punitive damages also must be his income because he has equal control over them and they grow out of the income-producing asset. And that, of course, is what's bothering me because it seems to me that your theory, which is a well-established theory, coupled with a Congress that seems to be willing to take away deductions for expenses that lead to the income, could produce an income tax that in many cases, not just a few, exceeds the income that an individual has. And I would like to know what in the law is there to guard against that result.
 Well, Your Honor, I guess my response to that is that, first --
 Other -- other than the mercy of the Internal Revenue Service. (Laughter.)
 Your Honor, the fact of the matter is, is that Congress has looked at -- at this issue, and in the new section that I just referred to, section 703 --
 Well, but does that happen? You haven't answered the question. Are there instances where plaintiffs in lawsuits end up receiving tax bills, as a result of this scheme, for more money than they received in the lawsuit?
 That has occurred, Your Honor.
 Yes.
 And -- and Congress responded to concerns about that very result --
 Well, but doesn't -- doesn't that indicate --
 -- in the new section.
 -- something basically flawed about your whole theory?
 No, Your Honor. It is --
 This is not income in any -- in any real sense.
 Is there any constitutional protection? The Sixteenth Amendment refers to an income tax, and perhaps that doesn't include a tax that grossly exceeds in many cases a person's income. That would be quite a far-out theory at the moment.
 I think it would be, Your Honor.
 But I -- that's why I ask you. Is there any protection in the law whatsoever? Or if Congress decides to tax a set of people who, let's see -- say, earn $10,000 a year and because they're small business people, they happen to have $20,000 expenses. So it taxes them on $20,000, and the tax exceeds the income. There's no protection in your view against that result. And you just said, well, Congress decided to do it, it decided to do it.
 But we do think, Your Honor, that the only limit on Congress' taxing authority would be the Constitution, and I don't see a constitutional violation in disallowing a deduction, but --
 What about an assumption, for example, that when we read the code, we read it with a view towards thinking Congress did not want to produce such unfair results?
 Your Honor, if I may. The way I would respond to that concern is that the proper way to address it is not as the courts below did and as respondents urge, to alter or distort the general definition for gross income under the -- under the tax code which may have broad ramifications in a number of areas outside of this one, but to go to Congress, as in fact people have done, and to get them to make -- make additional deductions or otherwise alter the alternative minimum tax, which generates the primary concern I think at issue in these cases.
 What happened in the cases --
 That's the proper way to handle that.
 There were cases -- we don't have to deal in hypotheticals. There were cases where this happened, where people ended up liable for a tax greater than what they took in. What happened in those cases?
 They were -- they were liable for a tax greater than what they took in. Those were pointed to Congress --
 I mean, there was one that was $99,000, if I remember right.
 I believe that's correct. Those were pointed out to Congress and that was part of what motivated Congress --
 Was there a private bill?
 -- to enact section 703 to protect --
 Or what happened? What actually happened in that case, do you know?
 I do not know, Your Honor. My -- my understanding is that the tax was assessed and I don't know whether --
 Mr. Salmons, I -- I -- you've cited the -- the Baylin case to me and I -- I've looked at the description of it in the brief, which I had recalled, and what it says is that it did, indeed, involve a taking by the State, and when the State didn't offer what Baylin thought was -- was enough, he went to court, he prevailed, and recovered a much larger sum than the State had offered him. His legal fees were, by the IRS, subtracted from the award, and he was taxed only upon the proceeds reduced by the legal fees. Now, how do you explain that situation there?
 Your Honor, if I --
 And how does that --
 -- misremembered that case, I apologize. My -- my recollection was that -- was that the court in that case had included the attorney's fees in gross income. But -- but --
 I doubt -- I doubt whether Professor Davenport has misdescribed the case in -- in his brief, but I --
 But -- but again, Your Honor, if I may. I think the -- the basic point to recall here is that the definition of gross income cuts across the tax code. If there are concerns about application, then the proper result is to go to Congress, as has been done. Congress has addressed the very concerns cited by respondents and the amici in this case, and that specifically is the -- the application on civil rights plaintiffs.
 Does the Fifth Amendment Takings Clause apply to a Government tax scheme that taxes something beyond the income received?
 Your Honor, it -- there may be -- there may be a takings issue at some point. Again, there may be constitutional limitations.
 Well, at the point where the Government charges more than the taxpayer received --
 But I think, Your --
 -- in income?
 Your Honor, I think when -- when what you're talking about is how to define --
 I mean, this is an appalling situation.
 Again, Your Honor, I -- I think as a general matter, the -- the proper definition of gross income would include the attorney's fees portion of litigation awards. It's important to note that the when Congress --
 What -- what do you we make of the fact that two Senators apparently don't agree with that position? I mean, I -- I'm referring to the colloquy that was quoted in -- in one of the -- the briefs about the recent legislation, and the -- the substance of the colloquy was we're not making any change in the law, we're just clarifying it. Well, in fact, if there is no textual difference for tax purposes between the law, so far as it concerns these -- these so-called discrimination recoveries and non-discrimination recoveries that have the same problem that Justice O'Connor is talking about, shouldn't we infer that at least the Senate of the United States assumes that this does not get into gross?
 No, Your Honor. In fact, what I would say is that the thing to focus on is what Congress actually enacted and it makes clear that all the litigation proceeds --
 I'm -- I'm talking about the colloquy. I'm talking about the colloquy.
 I -- I understand that, Your Honor, and what I'm trying to answer is that the -- the legislation itself makes clear that it's included in gross income and an above-the-line deduction is provided, and that the colloquy was referring to a prior version of the bill that would have been retroactive in part. The new bill is not retroactive, and we think it's clear that it does work a change because from, among other reasons, it's undisputed that if these fees had been paid on an hourly fee basis, they would have been included in gross income and -- and the alternative minimum tax would apply.
 We don't really know who prepared that colloquy anyway, do we?
 We do not.
 It might have been prepared by the respondents here.
 We do not. (Laughter.)
 If I may reserve the remainder of my time.
 Mr. Jones.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: My client and I are asking the Court to rule that the assignment of income doctrine does not apply when unrelated persons combine their resources to jointly generate income. And we --
 What -- so what -- what about the talent scout who tells the celebrity that he'll take 10 percent of the celebrity's movie proceeds or the management search person that's going to take a -- a third of the executive's pay for the first 6 months? Where -- are all -- all these cases ones in which there -- there's no income to the -- to the principal, we'll call them?
 You mentioned the -- the management agent and the -- I think you mentioned the talent agent, and there was also mentioned the literary agent. The -- the author is in the trade or business and gets to deduct all this off the top. There's no problem there.
 That's the -- that's the question I asked Mr. Salmons --
 Yes. The literary agent --
 -- and he gave me the opposite answer.
 Yes. The literary agent is in a trade or business. That's off the top. That's an ordinary and necessary business deduction on Schedule C.
 And that isn't the question.
 Yes.
 The -- the problem is you're -- you're trying to get a theory in response to him that I think Justice Kennedy is asking about.
 Yes.
 And that theory, which is the problem for your side of the case -- that theory has all kinds of implications. I go out and I help the painter paint my office. We have a joint venture. I -- so there's no problem. I don't take it in -- you know, I get a -- this is great. And so that I think, if I'm right, was the thrust of Justice Kennedy's question.
 Our first choice, our preference for this Court to rule is -- is not the partnership or joint venture theory. Our first choice is for this Court to simply look at the application of the assignment of income doctrine and ask it -- if it is being misapplied. The -- the petitioner has not cited to the Court a single, solitary case in which unrelated persons combine their resources to jointly produce income, and that is the rule of law I'm suggesting to the Court today. That is apart and separate from the partnership theory, that two unrelated persons who join together to produce income --
 It's a partnership theory when you talk about two persons joining together. I don't like this -- this gold mine view of litigation, that it's, you know, like two prospectors. You know, there's money to be obtained. (Laughter.)
 I --
 That's -- that's not what I view of a chosen action as. I view it as a legal right --
 Yes.
 -- that the person is entitled to money, and ultimately the amount he's entitled to is determined by the litigation. And I'm not about to adopt a -- a legal theory that -- that views this as a -- as a search for buried treasure --
 -- in -- in which the -- the lawyer and the person who has been wronged are -- are simply co-prospectors. I -- I just think that that's --
 Well, the --
 Maybe that's how you view the -- the enterprise --
 I would like to --
 -- but I don't think the law does.
 I would like to suggest to the Court three avenues to reach this result that I have just suggested and the partnership/joint venture theory is only one of those.
 Well, let's move on to something else because I have a couple -- (Laughter.)
 Okay. I will move on to that, and I will not mention that again. (Laughter.)
 This Court created the assignment of income doctrine. Congress did not create it. This Court has every right and power to limit its -- its definition, to limit its scope to keep it from being misapplied. In every case cited by the petitioner, we have a -- a family situation, related people making gifts to each other with no commercial purpose. Apart from the partnership and joint venture theory, if we simply say that this case is dramatically outside of the scope of that doctrine, of good doctrine that has been applied properly in an inter-family situation, but when you have two unrelated persons joining forces to produce income --
 Would you have a different result if they were related? Supposing the lawyer is a cousin of the client.
 This Court has a long history of recognizing --
 Or a good friend.
 -- of recognizing sham transactions.
 Well, it's not a sham transaction. You just happen to be related.
 All right.
 And I'm just wondering if that --
 I would like to focus on the gratuitous nature of the cases relied upon by the petitioner and the non-gratuitous aspects of our case. Let's talk about a personal injury case where this problem does not arise because there's no tax involved. This relationship of a contingent fee is entered into thousands of times every week by people injured in automobile accidents. They are not entering into this contingent fee agreement for tax purposes. They're not trying to avoid tax -- taxes. The commissioner is confusing intent with --
 All right. On -- on that theory, that there is a non-tax economic purpose, do you still maintain that your theory should have as an element unrelated people?
 I --
 Why do we need the question of the relationship, which Justice Stevens's questions raised, even to arise if -- if the principal criterion is going to be economic non-tax purpose?
 I agree completely. I was trying to emphasize the -- the intrafamily gratuitous nature of those cases, but I agree --
 There was no avoidance motive in the --
 Yes.
 -- granddaddy of all cases. The assignment there, although it was between family members, had been made before there was an income tax.
 But we must --
 The income tax didn't exist. There -- there couldn't conceivably have been an avoidance motive. So -- so our holding could hardly be based upon -- upon the existence of an avoidance motive.
 I'm asking the Court to skip over motive and look at result. The Court in that case was attacking a result because that arrangement stayed in place after the income tax was -- was enacted. The Solicitor General is confusing intent with result. In every case, in every single case, without exception, this doctrine has been applied to the result.
 Yes, but what if you had the same result but -- in terms of the sharing of the expense and the recovery, but it was computed on an hourly basis rather than a percentage basis? Would that produce a different result?
 It would produce a different result. The commissioner's case is based on could have's. They say they could have tried the case himself. He couldn't. But -- but the main thing he --
 No, but he could have made -- I'm saying he could have said to the lawyer, I'll pay you 30 -- a -- a third of the recovery or I'll pay you $100 an hour.
 Well, he --
 And they come out exactly the same result, but you -- but do you treat them differently or the same?
 We treat them differently simply because he didn't. I practice law in a partnership. I'm taxed accordingly. I could -- I could be -- set up my arrangement different ways and the tax results would be different. We must honor these relationships --
 What is different?
 Well, may I ask one --
 What is different?
 May I ask one other hypothetical? Supposing that the agreement on the contingency is postponed until the middle of the preparation, not made at the outset, but along the line, they say we'll figure out what a fair percentage will be, and when the recovery comes in, they then decide, okay, you take a third. What -- what result do you do in that case?
 I -- I have difficulty with that question.
 But I'm sure it arises fairly often.
 My -- I believe that attorneys don't allow themselves to be placed in that position. They get the contingent fee agreement signed when the -- the --
 Well, I did very often.
 But I don't know the answer to your question. I -- I don't know that. But an -- we -- the Internal Revenue Code respects people who enter into corporations, who enter into joint ventures, who enter into sole proprietorships, who hire employees or allow themselves to be hired by others. Those relationships are all respected and honored by the Internal Revenue Code, and the commissioner is asking you to dishonor this relationship because Mr. Banaitis could have handled the case himself or could --
 I think probably what's -- what's one of the problems here is that the reason this is income is it relates to employment. And I don't see why hiring the attorney to get that income is not an ordinary and necessary business expense under what used to be section 162. That may be part of the problem. Do you agree that it's not an ordinary and necessary business expense?
 I believe the problem is that a plaintiff has -- I wish I could say this plaintiff is in -- engaged in a trade or business and can deduct it or trade or -- as a trade or business expense.
 I mean, I suppose that's the reason -- that's the reason why it's taxable to begin with, is it relates to employment. If I hire an attorney because I'm wrongfully discharged and I get -- I get my job back, it seems to me that's an ordinary and necessary business expense. That -- that's why -- one of the reasons I have problems with this.
 I understand. But one of the -- the odd result here of a person having to pay more in taxes than they recover -- this actually comes up under a fee shifting statute that applies to the Internal Revenue Service where a person could be in litigation with the Internal Revenue Service, the Internal Revenue Service becomes obligated to pay fees because they acted unreasonably. They pay those fees, and then they simultaneously hand the taxpayer a bill for taxes on those fees.
 Well, let me get -- get to a different point. It -- it does seem to me that we -- we have to be very careful in this case not to distort the revenue law for other transactions that are not before the Court. And the -- the natural extension of your position is that anytime when the taxpayer enters into an agreement with an agent to pay the agents an amount contingent on the success of the venture, that it's not income, that -- that the -- that the payment is not income to the principal. And I just can't accept it.
 No. That is not my position. My position is that the assignment of income doctrine does not apply. Those relationships are all governed by existing law and there is a large body of law dealing with those cases and they can be found in a cite that is offered by the petitioner at page 3 of his reply brief. It talks about the literary agents. It talks about the -- the management agents.
 But what's the difference in principle. I don't understand the difference in principle when we're talking about who has the income. It's the first thing you ask in -- in a first-year -- in -- in your -- in your first class in tax. Where is the income? Who gets the income?
 I -- I am not trying to avoid your question, but I'm trying to clarify that I am not asking this Court to determine who has the income in those cases because there is a large body of law and a large body of statutory law that answers the questions for each of those examples. All I'm suggesting is that we do not get to those answers. We should not get to those answers through the assignment of income doctrine.
 What's your third? I just don't want you to miss your third. You have the joint venture theory, an exception to an assignment in income, and you said you had a third.
 The Oregon question, Your Honor, which I don't think the Court is likely interested in --
 The who?
 The -- the Oregon question.
 The Oregon question.
 The Oregon question. That is --
 What is the Oregon question?
 The Oregon question is part IV of our brief beginning on page 31 which would not be a national uniform rule. But what we're asking this Court to do is simply, as narrowly as possible, to limit the assignment of income doctrine and do nothing more than that.
 Well, what do you make of Professor Davenport's proposal to capitalize the contingency fee as a transaction?
 I believe Professor Davenport is completely correct. I support his theory wholeheartedly. We didn't make that argument because we believe the limitation on the assignment of income doctrine is the real issue and we believe that is the narrower issue.
 Well, if you took a settlement -- his theory, I take it, was seeing the lawsuit as a capital asset. Is that right?
 Yes. Well, I -- I think so.
 Well, then whenever you settled a lawsuit, it would be -- you'd have to pay capital gains instead of ordinary income.
 I -- I'm sorry. I think I misspoke. I'm not sure that's his theory. I'm not certain, and I'm --
 I'm sure it's not his theory. He -- he thinks it's -- it's attached to transactions, and -- and much of his argument is devoted to showing that capital transactions are no different from other transactions as far as the Internal Revenue Code's desire to match the -- the gain with the expenses concerned. And that's the part of his theory that I'm not so sure about because aside from the -- aside from the condemnation case that I mentioned, I -- I don't know of any other cases in which the Internal Revenue Service has treated transaction costs the way he would have it done. Maybe it makes sense, but I --
 I would like to make one additional point in the few seconds I have left. The -- the Solicitor General is arguing that the language, the statutory language, of the new statute implies a particular result. This Court decided as early as 1940 in the Higgins v. Smith case when the commissioner made the exact same argument, and this Court said -- and I quote -- that does not follow. The statutory language says that to the extent this income is -- this -- this money is included in income, to the extent it is included in income -- it doesn't say whether it is or not -- then a deduction will be allowed. And that as neutral a statement as I can think of. There is nothing in the statutory language that implies one answer or the other. But I emphasize to the Court that the -- the commissioner is confusing intent with result when he discusses the cases upon which he is relying. Those cases reached a result and they corrected that result. We don't have an abuse in this situation. And the assignment of income doctrine should not be stretched beyond its bounds by this Court. It should be limited to its historical use. This is a misuse. Thank you very much.
 Thank you, Mr. Jones. Mr. Carty.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens. Neither section 61(a) nor any other provision of the Internal Revenue Code expressly requires that a Federal civil rights litigant, such as Mr. Banks, include in his gross income the portion of a litigation recovery that was earned by, retained by, and already taxed to his attorney as a contingent fee. The commissioner's position in this case relies exclusively on the misapplication of a judicial doctrine known as the assignment of income doctrine. That doctrine originated and developed as a judicial anti-abuse rule, designed to prevent high-bracket taxpayers --
 No, it didn't.
 I respectfully --
 It -- it originated in a case where there could not possibly have been an intent -- an intent to abuse because the -- the transfer had occurred before there was any income tax.
 Justice --
 I mean, just -- just don't -- maybe you think that that's what it ought to be, but -- but please don't tell us that that is how it originated. It plainly did not originate that way.
 Justice Scalia, I respectfully disagree. It is true, as the commissioner and you point out, that at the time of the agreement between the husband and wife, the income tax was not in existence. However, the agreement certainly was in existence after the income tax was passed. So that could have been a reason why the agreement was never rescinded. In addition, in another landmark case from 1937, Blair, this Court expressly looked to whether there was a tax avoidance motive. And this is how this principle is taught in first-year tax class. That's the whole purpose behind this. As a matter of fact, the commissioner in a -- in a different context actually looked to the fact, with respect to a particular transaction, whether there was a tax avoidance purpose.
 That's a different argument. I'm -- I'm just quarreling over whether it originated that way. If you want to say --
 Under -- under your view --
 -- that's fine.
 -- suppose that the attorney is -- is waiting for payment of -- of his, say, one-third contingent fee, and the client just absconds with the money. How is -- what -- what happens from a tax standpoint under your theory? I take it the attorney has to declare the income on his return and then declare a loss?
 Well, certainly the attorney has a legal right to those funds. He has a contractual right and under most --
 I'm asking you about the tax consequences.
 Well, at -- at that point the income wouldn't have inured to the benefit of the attorney.
 Well, but I -- I thought under your view the moment the client gets the check for the full amount, one-third of it is taxable to the attorney. And I have some problems, incidentally, with respect to tax years if it -- if you -- if the client receives the check December 30 and is on vacation and doesn't get around to remitting to the attorney until January 5th, I'm -- I'm not quite sure how your theory works, but --
 Justice Kennedy, I -- I think the --
 But on the absconding theory, how -- how is it handled from a tax standpoint?
 I believe that for tax purposes the attorney's right to the funds -- that's at the moment he receives it. So if he doesn't have the funds in hand, he wouldn't be liable for Federal tax. It would be at the point he either receives the funds --
 Aren't -- aren't you --
 This is an academic question because he would have an offsetting theft loss.
 I -- I think that is an alternative way to -- to view it. There would be a --
 If -- if you view it as the theft loss, you -- you maintain your theory. If you argue, as you were arguing a second ago, I think what, in fact, you're doing is adopting the mere lien theory.
 Justice Souter, I -- I --
 I think you better go with Justice Ginsburg. (Laughter.)
 Like somebody stealing a check out of my mailbox from my employer. Right? Okay.
 Yes.
 So what is your theory, I mean, precisely? A, an assignment of income, what would otherwise count of A giving an assignment of income to B, and therefore still be A's income because the asset remains with A, the work, or whatever. Now, your theory is but not in the case that. Now fill in the blank for me.
 Justice --
 Precisely, please.
 It would not be in the case that the funds are not under the control of the attorney.
 Not in the case -- it is an assignment of income to B, but not in the case where the funds are not in -- when B -- when B get -- when B, the attorney, gets the funds, he controls them. What's -- what do you mean? I don't get it.
 I thought your hypothetical --
 I want to know. You have three -- your problem on your side for me is that maybe all the equities are there, but I'd like to know the proposition of law that you want us to write in this opinion. And now we had three theories, and one, the one that you seem to be adopting, is this exception to the assignment of income doctrine. If that is what you're adopting, I'd like to know the precise form of words that create the exception. If that's not the theory you're adopting, I would like to know what the theory you're adopting is.
 I would state, Your Honor, that the assignment of income doctrine simply does not apply when the -- the client has no control or power of disposition over the income that was subject to the assignment. There are at least five reasons why this type of contract --
 But he did have control. He could have settled the lawsuit or not settled the lawsuit. He controlled when the income was generated, and moreover, he could have stopped it from being generated by settling the suit or dismissing it. Moreover, if he had not entered into this assignment of income, it would have been paid right into his bank account at the end. It sounds an awful lot like the Lucases or like the Horsts or whoever, Old Colony Trust. It sounds an awful lot like those cases.
 Justice Breyer, I -- I think it's helpful to make a conceptual distinction between the claim, the underlying litigation claim, and the right to receive the funds. Now, certainly Mr. Banks in this case had a right to enter into settlement or not. He had a right to fire his attorney. But once he assigned the contingent fee portion of the recovery, he, as a practical matter, had no ability, he had no control over that portion of the recovery. Another fundamental difference between --
 That -- that would be the same with the theater agent or the commission agent.
 We submit, Justice Kennedy, that the nature of the attorney-client relationship is fundamentally different from the types of relationships you cited, and that's because an attorney here is the one who's earning the income. It's the attorney who is making the critical decisions.
 Well, you could say the same thing for the talent scout.
 I would respectfully disagree. I -- I think there's a -- there's a fundamental difference. Presumably a -- a actor or an entertainer -- their -- their market value is -- already has some type of tangible value. The -- the agent might --
 Your client, in effect, earned the money by having this -- undergo this -- this discrimination. That -- that's --
 Well, Your Honor --
 This is not the plumber hypothetical, which is I think quite misleading. No. No, I don't think that even the Government will defend that.
 Again, Your Honor, I think with respect to an entertainer, an entertainer necessarily doesn't need an agent. Neither does an athlete.
 Take an investment advisor and the client is not at all -- doesn't know anything about the market, and he's got this whiz-bang advisor who makes millions for him that he never could have made on his own.
 I -- I think that might be more similar to the attorney-client relationship. But Mr. Banks, unlike the athlete or unlike the entertainer, had no -- no ability to -- to recover these funds himself. He essentially had two options. He could have either done nothing and collected nothing --
 Your -- your -- you want to fill in the blank, in other words, and say where the assignment of income is such, such that B was in effect the person who really earned the income, unlike Mrs. Lucas' -- what Mr. Lucas' or maybe Mr. Earl -- I don't know --
 That's correct.
 -- husband -- the wife didn't earn the income.
 Right.
 The husband did. So you want to say where the -- and then your answer, I guess -- don't say I'm right if I'm not right, please, because I'll just find out later. (Laughter.)
 The -- the answer to the hypothetical about the agent and so forth is, well, so be it. If a person wants to go to the trouble of carving out some of his income and assigning that over to the agent, let him. Except for perhaps provisions of the code which we cannot now envisage -- I can't because I'm not an expert -- it doesn't matter since, after all, it would be deductible anyway. Is that -- is that what you're saying?
 Well, Your Honor --
 Tell me if I'm wrong, please, on this.
 Again, I -- what we're saying is the unique situation of an attorney and a client, it is the attorney who's taking the laboring, or unlike the entertainer example where the -- where -- or the athlete example --
 Okay, I see. You say double. Both the income is earned by the attorney, and at that stage the client does virtually nothing. So it's the reverse of the Earls or the Lucases where the husband was doing the work and the wife is getting the income. It would be as if the wife was doing all the work and the husband just sat there and clipped coupons or whatever.
 That's correct, Your Honor, and in Lucas v. Earl, it was the assignor who earned the income that was subject to disposition. Here --
 I'm not so sure about that because why doesn't the theory that -- that applies to the lawyer equally apply to the wife? I mean, she took care of everything going on at home, and that enabled him to go out there and make all that money. So without her services, just like without the lawyer's services --
 That is an excellent point, Your Honor.
 You should agree with that. You should -- (Laughter.)
 Those were less enlightened times.
 Nevertheless -- nevertheless, I -- I think there may be some -- some difference in degree that you might even recognize between the two cases. Another issue I'd like to address is the impact of the fee shifting statutes, if I could get to that quickly. It is a bedrock principle of taxation that settlements of a claim are taxed the same as a judgment would have been taxed. Mr. Banks' settlement was achieved in lieu of his claims under title VII and 42 U.S.C., sections 1981 and 1983. Now, each of these statutes contains a fee shifting provision which enables a court to award attorney's fees to a prevailing plaintiff. The defendant in Mr. Banks' case, the California Department of Education -- they therefore settled Mr. Banks' claim in lieu of their exposure under these fee shifting statutes. An award pursuant to these fee shifting statutes is separate and distinct from a damages recovery and therefore should not be taxable to a plaintiff. And the Federal tax consequences to Mr. Banks, the litigant who settles, shouldn't be any different as well. Otherwise, this Court would be discouraging settlement. Therefore, a judicial anti-abuse rule should not be misused to undermine the statutory scheme devised by Congress to encourage civil rights litigants to bring meritorious claims and vindicate national policy. Unless the Court has any further questions?
 The Government says on that branch of it, well, the fees -- the lodestar fee, that's one thing. A court awards it, but that's quite different from the one-third/one-half even contingent fee. The court has control over the fee shifting, but we're not dealing with any court award here.
 That's correct, Justice Ginsburg. Mr. Banks settled his claims. Yet, we are pressing the point that Mr. Banks shouldn't be treated any differently for tax purposes than a litigant who recovers pursuant to a fee shifting statute. Otherwise, the Court would be discouraging settlement. If there's any other questions.
 Thank you, Mr. Carty.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Salmons, you have a little over 2 minutes.
 Thank you, Your Honor. It is clear that the only thing that respondents' attorneys earned under the fee agreements was the right to be paid a fee for their services. In petitioner's view, those agreements don't even give rise to an assignment of income in the ordinary sense. If you look at the text of the fee agreement in the Banaitis case -- the Banks' fee agreement is not in the record -- among other things, it makes clear that if there is a termination -- and it provides lots of grounds on which the attorney-client relationship can be terminated -- that the attorney will be paid a reasonable fee, calculated at the sum of $175 per hour. That doesn't sound like an assignment of any income or even an assignment of the underlying cause of action. Even if it did, it is clear that in every assignment of income case, the assignor loses control over that income that he assigned. That doesn't stop the application of the proper tax principles, however. The -- the respondents in these cases suffered a legally cognizable injury. They had a claim. That claim entitled them to a recovery. They retained services to pursued that claim. If they had paid their lawyers on an hourly basis, those lawyers may have been just as necessary to the actual outcome of the case as their contingent fee attorneys. Both the -- an hourly fee attorney and a contingent fee attorney in both of the States at issue here -- and in fact, in all States of which I'm aware -- received precisely the same attorney's lien. That lien makes clear that the relationship between attorney and client starts out as that between a master and an agent and then is converted through the fee agreement to that between a creditor and a debtor, and the lien secures the debt and ensures its payment. When the proceeds from the litigation are paid to the attorney, it satisfies the respondent's debt and is therefore income to the attorney. Under the separate and alternative ground of this Court's Old Colony decision, it goes far and beyond even the holding with regard to an assignment of income. To address just a couple of questions that came up, I would point out that in the class action context, again, as I indicated, there are a number of differences. And just to be a little more specific about some of them, generally speaking there's no unilateral right to settle a -- a case by class members. There's no unilateral right to dismiss the case, and there's no right to a determined fee.
 Thank you, Mr. Salmons.
 Thank you.
 The case is submitted.
 We'll now -- we'll now hear argument in Rhines against Weber. Mr. Lange. You may proceed, Mr. Lange.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Stay and abeyance is the proper way to administer the total exhaustion rule under the unique facts of this case. Several Justices of this Court already have endorsed stay and abeyance, and seven of the eight circuit courts of appeals that have considered the issue have permitted stay and abeyance under similar circumstances. Section 2254 and the decisions of this Court in Granberry v. Greer and Strickland v. Washington make clear that exhaustion is not a jurisdictional requirement. District courts have the inherent authority and the broad discretion to issue stays in cases that are within their jurisdiction.
 I think that's unquestionable. The -- the issue really is whether it's an abuse of that discretion to -- to grant a stay and abeyance when the -- the petitioner comes before the court for habeas without having exhausted in State court. I mean, that's the question. I think everybody will stipulate that there's power to -- to stay proceedings, but is it an abuse of discretion to do so in these circumstances given the statute that -- that wants a 1-year, prompt resort to the Federal courts.
 Justice Scalia, I agree with your framing of the issue.
 Okay.
 And I also believe that a stay under these circumstances is appropriate under the statutes, section 2254 and 2244, and is consistent with those statutes. There is nothing, as Justice Souter noted in his concurrence in Duncan v. Walker, that prohibits the -- the granting of a stay under circumstances such as these. Indeed --
 Well, there's no -- there's no abuse of discretion here. Why? Because we have an interest in having all of the claims exhausted? If -- if it's no more -- if it's as broad as that, then there's no AEDPA statute of limitations.
 No, Your Honor. I believe there is no abuse of the discretion here because if a stay had not --
 Well, why shouldn't -- why shouldn't the petitioner for habeas have to first go to the State court and exhaust the State court claims? Here that wasn't done. The petitioner eventually ended up in Federal court with a laundry list of 30-some unexhausted State claims, for goodness sakes. Why shouldn't those have been presented in the first instance to the State court?
 Well, in an ideal world, they would be presented in the first instance, but we're dealing with a -- a world where 93 percent of petitioners are proceeding pro se. Your Honor, stay and abeyance does force a petitioner to present unexhausted claims in State court --
 At the price of suspending the 1-year statute of limitations that Congress thought was central to AEDPA.
 No, Your Honor. I do not see this as a suspension of the statute of limitations. Mr. Rhines met the AEDPA statute of limitations. He filed when only, by the State's own admission, 8 to 14 days had run on his 1-year AEDPA statute of limitations.
 Well, but it's a free ride if you say -- so long as you get in within the 1-year period, the court can then give you another 3 years or as long as the court thinks is reasonable for you to go back and -- and do what you were supposed to do before you arrived. I mean, that seems to me is a frustration of the 1-year statute of limitations.
 I disagree that that is a free ride, and I do not see that as a frustration of the 1-year statute of limitations when a petitioner has met the 1-year statute of limitations. Your Honor --
 But the petitioner --
 No, but the point --
 -- didn't go to the State court with this enormous laundry list of unexhausted claims. I mean, what do we do to encourage the procedure to be followed? Congress did want all this compressed and thought people should apply first to State court and, when those are exhausted, then within the time limit apply to Federal court. But this -- this scheme does something else, it seems to me.
 Your Honor, Congress wanted to compress certainly the time between exhaustion of the State remedies and the time when the petitioner came to Federal court. However, Congress gave unlimited tolling while there is any proceeding going in -- in State court. I -- I see this stay and abeyance as a procedure that gets applied somewhat infrequently and at the discretion of a judge to -- a district court judge to apply or not apply when it's appropriate to --
 Is there a difference -- would you say there's a difference between a case where the petitioner comes into Federal court in the first instance with this laundry list or as, if I recall correctly, this case, goes first to the State court and then, when it's dismissed from the State court, comes to Federal court with the same basic list which has been exhausted, plus others which have not? Would you distinguish the case on the propriety of stay and abeyance of passing up the State court, going to Federal court first, going to State court with your pro se petition raising a bunch of claims but not all of them, and then coming to Federal court?
 I think it truly depends on the circumstances which of those two hypotheticals present a more compelling case for stay and abeyance. In Mr. Rhines situation, he did go to State court first and exhausted the vast majority of the 35 separate claims that he has raised.
 How many -- how many were not exhausted of that -- that laundry list?
 The court -- or the State challenged 12 of the claims as unexhausted. The district court found eight of those claims to be unexhausted, Your Honor, and made that finding after Mr. Rhines' 1-year AEDPA period had run. The finding -- Mr. Rhines had filed in February of 2000 pro se. The district court's conclusion that he had a mixed petition and that there were eight unexhausted claims was made in July of 2002.
 16 months.
 It's actually a little bit -- it's longer than 16 months, Your Honor. The district court referred to 16 months, but it's almost 2 and a half years, from February of 2000 to July of 2002, Your Honor.
 One of the problems is that the statute encourages prompt resolution in -- in the Federal system as well, and under a stay and abey procedure, you could have a district judge who lets the matter sit for 9-10 months and all of a sudden issues a stay and abey. How are we going to control that?
 Your Honor, I think the alternative that the State proposes presents an even more troubling illustration. A district court, of course, can proceed at its own -- at its own rate, grant a stay, grant the terms of the stay as it sees fit, and I believe that takes care of the consideration that -- that Your Honor's question indicated, Justice Kennedy. The suggestion of the State sets up a situation where, according to the State, they want Rhines to purge his -- his claim -- his petition of the unexhausted claims and proceed in State court at the same time, which is unseemly to have Mr. Rhines proceeding on 27 exhausted claims in Federal court at the same time that he is proceeding on 8 claims in State court. Now, South Dakota is a little bit unique. It -- it allows a second State habeas action. There's no time bar to a second State habeas action. In fact, the South Dakota legislature has made a policy decision that indigent prisoners are entitled to representation of counsel in their first habeas.
 Well, so then he's protected in the State system, and if he needs Federal review, he can come here on direct.
 Your Honor, the problem is the eight claims that he is now exhausting in State court, if the State's approach is taken, he forever sacrifices, loses the right to Federal review of those eight claims.
 No. He can come to -- here -- this Court on direct review.
 Excuse me. Under direct review? Is --
 He can come to this Court on certiorari after the State decision in the second -- in the second habeas.
 Your Honor, as a matter of --
 It's fair for you to say he loses his right to Federal review --
 Right. Your --
 -- because we wouldn't necessarily take that case, whereas you say he'd have a right to go into Federal -- Federal habeas. So --
 Thank you for throwing me the life preserver. I -- (Laughter.)
 I understand this Court grants fewer than 1 percent of the cases, so as a practical matter, for there to be an independent review, as contemplated by section 2254(a), it does require a district court's involvement. As a practical matter, this Court on -- on cert can't be expected to -- to conduct that review. 2254(a), which is the statute that grants jurisdiction, does indicate that a Federal court shall entertain causes of this action. Now, 2254(b) does contain the exhaustion requirement in (b)(1) and makes clear in (b)(2) and (b)(3) that it is not jurisdictional. The -- the irony --
 Would we have to -- would we have to reverse in part Rose against Lundy to go with your view?
 I don't believe so anymore than you would have to reverse in part Rose v. Lundy to go with the State's view. And let me explain. The approach of stay and abeyance is more consistent with the principles of Rose v. Lundy than the -- than the State's position. In Rose, this Court was concerned about comity and federalism. It -- it serves the interests of comity and federalism for a Federal court to suspend consideration of a Federal habeas case while a petitioner has a remedy and is actually pursuing it in State court. The petitioner may be granted the remedy in State court, which in turn would render the Federal petition moot altogether. There could be, between the competing State and Federal cases, competition for the transcript or even the exhibits. Rose v. Lundy also contemplated a process that would not unreasonably impair the petitioner's right and would give the petitioner the choice of either purging the unexhausted claims or going back to State court, exhausting the claims, and then coming back to Federal court with one fully exhausted --
 Well, that was at a time before the AEDPA enactment that tried to put limits, time limits, on these things.
 The only --
 That's what we run into here, is a total frustration almost of Congress' time limiting.
 Your Honor, I -- I would disagree that this is a total frustration of Congress' time limiting -- time limiting. Again, Congress granted unlimited tolling while a petitioner is pursuing remedies in State court. Congress was not attempting to frustrate or impede the petitioner's right to seek State court relief or --
 Yes, but Congress, I think under this scheme, envisioned having someone make all the State claims the first time around, gather them up and go to State court, and let them take as long as they like -- no statute will run until that's complete -- and then go to the Federal court. And this does an end run around that approach.
 Your Honor, I don't believe this does an end run because this is different than -- than tolling. First of all, in tolling it's automatic under a statute, and stay and abeyance is always discretionary with the court. The court can grant or deny the stay and abeyance order, alter it, revoke it, or in this case, put time limits on the petitioner's right to go back and -- and forth. Also, Mr. Rhines has complied with the AEDPA period. He did file. The unusual situation that could result here is if you assume a prisoner B who's in Rhines' same position and files at the same time, when only approximately 9 days have elapsed on his AEDPA period. Petitioner B, let's assume, files three claims: one exhausted, one unexhausted, and one there's a dispute over whether it's exhausted or not. Because petitioner B had a short trial perhaps or draws a different judge in the District of South Dakota, the judge can rule on that case perhaps within 100 days. It gives petitioner B, under my scenario, 256 days to go to State court, exhaust his claims, and then come back into Federal court with one fully exhausted petition. Rhines would be in the position of prisoner B in my scenario but for the fact that his claims are -- are much more complicated. He is serving a -- a sentence of death. He did have a long trial. And under that situation, it's simply unfair to someone in Rhines' place to have his right to a review of the eight unexhausted claims cut short because he had a complicated case or the district court was slow in getting to a decision.
 That -- that happens often with time limits. I mean, it depends on when the court finishes its job and so forth. What do you do about -- about our opinion in -- in Duncan v. Walker where we refused to toll the limitation period during the pendency of a -- of the Federal proceeding and -- and said, in -- in justification of that holding, by tolling the limitation period for the pursuit of State remedies and not during the pendency of applications for Federal review, 2244 provides a powerful incentive for litigants to exhaust all available State remedies before proceeding in the lower Federal courts? You are now urging us to eliminate that incentive entirely.
 No, Your Honor.
 Why not?
 I believe there's always a very powerful incentive to prisoners to exhaust in full because if they file a mixed petition, they're not going to have relief.
 Sometimes --
 (b)(1) says it shall not be granted.
 Well, you said -- you said in your brief that -- that it's always in the -- with the possible exception of capital cases, it's always in the interest of a habeas applicant to get -- get it decided as soon as possible. That's not really true. Sometimes it's -- it's in his interest to delay it as much as possible. Witnesses will die. People will move away. All sorts of -- there are all sorts of reasons why he -- he might want to delay the process.
 I think those illustrations are -- are the -- very much the exception rather than the rule, as this Court recognized in --
 Well, what about the exceptional case? I mean, how do we avoid the exceptional case?
 Well, I think that's then the district court's task that has more familiarity with the particular case.
 Which can do what?
 The district court can refuse to issue a stay and abeyance order. It can put tight deadlines on a stay and abeyance order. The district court can revoke a stay and abeyance order. It can alter it if there is delay. I believe that is a decision that should be left to the court that's closest to the facts, the district court.
 Do you think the procedure should be any different between capital cases and noncapital cases? We're basically talking about what would be an abuse of discretion, as you indicated at the outset. Do you think the same rule should apply to both, or do you think there might be -- because there is a greater incentive to delay in the capital case than there is in the noncapital case.
 You're right, Justice Stevens. I -- it's difficult to develop a rule that distinguishes between the two classes, but I do believe that's in the realm of the discretion of the district court. The district court can set very tight deadlines on a petitioner returning to State court to exhaust remaining remedies like the Court here set a deadline of 60 days, and in the circuit courts, more commonly the deadline is 30 days to go back to State court and then 30 days to return once the State proceeding is -- is completed.
 But you -- you don't really think we can hold that line, giving less favorable treatment to somebody who's -- who's trying to argue against a capital penalty, less favorable treatment to him than somebody who's -- who just wants to avoid 10 years in jail? That's just not going to work.
 I'm not advocating less favorable treatment or more favorable treatment for that matter. I believe the rule has to be consistent between the two.
 Could you just replay the order of the proceedings? The first petition is to the State court. Was the defendant in that first State habeas represented by counsel?
 Yes, he was, Your Honor.
 So he's been represented by counsel throughout.
 Well, he filed his Federal habeas petition pro se. The counsel was appointed shortly afterwards, yes, Your Honor.
 But the -- the State application that preceded that -- he was represented there.
 Yes, Your Honor.
 And then he lost his representation when he came to the Federal court?
 Justice Ginsburg, a different lawyer gets appointed in the Federal court system than represented him in the -- in the State court system.
 How -- how general is -- is this problem? And -- and to what extent is it tied to the fact that you can bring a second habeas in South Dakota? I mean, in -- in most States, if this had happened, I presume, when you went back to the State court, the State court would say, you know, you didn't -- you didn't put in these claims the last time around and they're procedurally barred. Isn't that what would happen in -- in most other States?
 I think that's an excellent point and on footnotes 9 and 10 of the yellow brief, there is a litany of the State procedural rules, and many States would bar a second habeas or would put a strict time limit that the petitioner could not meet. South Dakota is different in that regard.
 Yes.
 South Dakota allows a second habeas and, indeed, allows a petitioner in a second habeas to show cause for a default by proving that he received ineffective assistance of habeas counsel, which is unique among the States. Yes, many States that don't allow a second remedy would -- would not -- we would not be in this situation that we are here. However, South Dakota does. And in fairness to Mr. Rhines, it makes sense to stay the Federal petition and to allow him to exhaust his State court remedies on satisfaction of Rose and to come back with a fully exhausted claim.
 Unless what would happen in these other States as the -- is that the court would grant the -- the stay of proceedings in order to let him go back to the State court and be told after however long it takes that -- that his -- his claims are now procedurally barred. Do you think the Federal court would simply make its own determination that the claims would be rejected by the State court and therefore it would not stay? I don't know.
 I -- I believe that would -- could be and -- and should be a factor in a district court's consideration of whether to grant stay and abeyance, Your Honor. The State has expressed concerns about delay. There are four reasons why those concerns are overstated. First, in the 3 and a half years since Duncan v. Walker was decided, there have been cases in circuit courts of appeals that have approved of the stay and abeyance procedure. None of those cases evidence that it is being misused or is causing undue delay. Second, the terms of the stay themselves can restrict a petitioner's delay, as I've already recounted the -- the district court did here. Third, this Court in Slack v. McDaniel addressed very similar arguments to what the State is making now about delay through a second habeas filing. And this -- this Court noted that the Rules of Civil Procedure vest courts with flexibility to prevent vexatious or delayed litigation and that there are other reasons why those concerns expressed in Slack v. McDaniel were -- were overwrought. Fourth and finally, on the prospect of delay, as already mentioned in answer to one of Justice Scalia's questions, the vast majority of petitioners are not under a capital sentence. It is not hyperbole to say that 99.4 percent of Federal section 2254 habeas petitioners are not serving -- are not under a capital penalty. Those are statistics from the year 2000 from the Department of Justice. And those, I think with the extremely rare exception, are people who believe rightly or wrongly that they're in prison because their constitutional rights have been violated and would not favor delay under any circumstance. So the delay concern that the State raises is -- is overwrought. Unless there are other questions, I'd reserve my remaining time for rebuttal.
 Thank you, Mr. Lang. General Long, we'll hear from you, please.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: Congress -- excuse me. Congress carefully crafted a scheme designed to encourage State prisoners first to exhaust all of their State post-conviction remedies and then to file their habeas corpus petitions as soon as possible. The congressional design includes three mutually dependent statutes, including a 1-year statute of limitations, a tolling provision, and a total exhaustion requirement, the combined effect of which is supposed to reduce delay, serve the principles of comity, finality, and federalism. However, stay and abeyance erodes each side of this triangular statutory design. Stay and abeyance allows tolling in Federal court when Duncan said there should be none. It extends the statute of limitations beyond 1 year, and it ignores the total exhaustion requirement of 2254(b). The result is that State prisoners, especially capital prisoners, are encouraged to file mixed petitions and rewarded with delay if they do so.
 What -- what is your answer to -- to your -- your brother's answer on this, and -- and that is, that the -- the existence of stay and abey as a possibility is not a right to stay and abey? And -- and if a district judge finds that a -- there is reason to believe that the defendant is gaming the system, because he's a capital defendant and wants to delay or wants delay for any other reason, there's -- there's no requirement that -- that there be a stay and -- and abeyance order. And why -- why doesn't that take care of what I -- I think is a very legitimate issue that you raise? Why isn't that a -- a sufficient answer to it?
 I think that -- I think that the -- the answer is that Congress designed the system to resolve all those issues in State court first. I think one of the things that needs to be kept in mind is that an unexhausted claim is, by its very nature and by definition, a claim where there's an available remedy in State court.
 Oh, again, there's no question about that. And -- and in a perfect -- sort of in a perfect system, I think your objection would be unanswerable. The trouble with the system we've got is -- is the trouble that -- that is -- is undisputed here, and that is, that most of these petitions, the overwhelming number of them, are going to be pro se petitions. Exhaustion can -- can be tricky. The -- the statute of limitations is -- is going to run and -- and an individual can end up in the -- in the situation that this one had. What -- what he's asking for, in effect, is how do we tinker with the system, in effect, to prevent its being a -- a very unfair burden on people who don't have the sophistication to help themselves.
 I don't think the system needs to be tinkered with, Your Honor.
 Well, I -- I know but there's -- what -- what is your answer on the merits to the fact that most of the people who are going to ask for stay and abey are -- are going to be pro ses, or at least have gotten into the mess that they're in as a result of pro se representation, and -- and that -- that exhaustion in close cases can be a very -- very tricky issue? What -- what's your response to that?
 My response is in two parts. First of all, Your Honor, I agree with you that exhaustion can be a tricky issue, but it's -- it's the most tricky in the question about whether or not the question has been fairly presented. The less tricky portion of the question is whether or not the claim is unexhausted, having been -- that means there's an available remedy in State court. The easy way to sort that out is just to file your claim in State court. If there is in fact an available remedy, then you get tolling, and that solves the problem. I --
 I'm not sure -- I'm not sure it's -- it's true, are you, that -- that the reason people get into these situations is because they were pro se. That wasn't the case here. I -- I think they probably get into this situation very often because they have a better or at least a different lawyer at the Federal habeas stage than they had at the State habeas stage, and this new lawyer sees additional claims that -- that he wants to make. Isn't -- isn't that exactly what happened here?
 That's -- I -- I suspect that's the typical case in -- in capital cases. Mr. Rhines is currently --
 It's typical. I mean, what I have in the statistics is that about 36 percent of all the habeases are dismissed for failure to exhaust, and 93 percent of all of the habeas petitioners are pro se. Now, the conclusions I draw for that is it's probably these pro se people -- I mean, 93 percent are pro se -- that will get the procedural dismissals, and certainly a third or so, if we agree with you, of all of the habeas petitions filed in -- in Federal court are going to be finished, terminated. The door is closed because it takes a Federal court about nine months on average to process a habeas. Now, you just take that and you say, we've closed the door of the Federal court to a third of all the habeas petitioners. And if I had thought that Congress wanted that, then I might say fine. But I thought that Duncan -- and I know I was on the other side of the case, but I felt the majority had a pretty good point on the language, to tell you the truth. But what I didn't think they had such a -- I mean, I couldn't find much of a congressional purpose one way or the other there. I thought the purpose of the statute of limitations is really to get people to file their petitions. Once they file them, they have a year but it's tolled. You know, I mean, you understand the thing. I -- I'm really looking for you to tell me some tremendously strong congressional purpose that's served so strong that you want to knock a third of the petitioners out of Federal court forever.
 I think it's less complicated than that, Your Honor. I think that it --
 That's pretty simple.
 I --
 The door is closed forever. I mean --
 I disagree. I disagree with you, Justice Breyer. I -- I think that even for a pro se petitioner, I do not think it is more difficult for him to find the door of the State courthouse than it is to find the door of the Federal courthouse. And the key, I think, to your argument is that claims are unexhausted by definition if there's an available State court remedy. Therefore, by definition, they ought to be going to the State courthouse rather than the Federal courthouse.
 The --
 They seem to have made a mistake here quite a lot. Why do these statistics come out the way they do? I mean, it is just as easy.
 I -- I can't --
 I agree with you. Why -- why aren't they filing -- why -- why are they all filing so many, 36 percent filing in the wrong court? Why is that?
 You know, it -- it could be, I suppose, that these people have nothing else to do sitting around in the jailhouse, and -- and having written their State petition, they sit around for a few more months and they say, you know, there are a few more claims I could make. I think that's -- it's as simply as that. And -- and what the statute is designed to do, I -- I think you're telling us, is to say, look it, be careful. Make all your claims in the State court the first time. That doesn't seem to me to be too much to demand.
 Justice Scalia, I think that's exactly what the statute -- the statutes -- the three read together and enforced together --
 But they're all --
 I take it -- I take it that one of the answers to the observation that the Federal court is closed to a third of the claims is that that's not true with respect to the exhausted claims. The -- the petition can simply be purged as to unexhausted claims and as to the exhausted claims, the courthouse door remains open.
 Well, I agree with that. The -- let's -- let's deal with the facts in this case.
 May I ask you --
 Please.
 -- with respect to this case? I thought this case was such a good illustration of the problem. If claims came into the Federal court neatly labeled, exhausted, unexhausted, then I think that you would have a very strong argument. But as this case illustrates, the question of whether it's been exhausted or not is something on which people can disagree. And I suppose why the district court took well over a year to decide this case is the petitioner says, I've exhausted everything, and the prosecutor says, you have not exhausted 12. And the district court is going by the -- going over these one by one and says in the end, you're both wrong. My list is eight. And it's that problem of has this claim been exhausted. Now, if it was a case of deliberately withholding a case from State court and bringing it up fresh in -- in the Federal court, that would be a case where the Federal court should say, go away, you didn't even try. But what do you do with these cases where it's really hard to tell whether the claim has been exhausted?
 That was not the situation in this case, Your Honor.
 Then why did the -- the district judge says four on the State's list have been exhausted?
 Well, the -- factually the court -- the court examined the amended petition and concluded that eight claims in the amended petition were unexhausted. The problem is this -- or -- or at least the variance in the facts from what you suggest is this. Mr. Rhines filed an amended petition in November of 2000 with counsel, after having been through all the record. He admitted in his amended petition that four of the claims were unexhausted. He still had 80 days left to run on the statute of limitations. So he conceded in his amended petition in Federal court that he still had 80 days to run -- while there was still 80 days to run on the statute of limitation, that four of the claims he submitted in the petition were unexhausted. That's not difficult to sort out because defense counsel admitted it, as he pled them. And so there isn't tricky question about whether there were unexhausted claims in this petition. Now, that was in November of 2000. He waited until the court decided the decision in July of 2002 and didn't pursue his State court remedies until the court ordered him to do that in July of 2002. And he filed his State habeas to exhaust those admittedly unexhausted claims.
 So that -- that would take care of the four claims. How about the other four?
 Well, it doesn't make any difference at that point, Your Honor. If there's a single, solitary unexhausted claim, the problem --
 Well, they --
 -- is not -- is not worse if there gets to be 12 or 15.
 But those could be -- those could be dropped out of the Federal complaint. There you're saying, district judge, you would be abusing your discretion because admitting that he hadn't exhausted these, he should have gone immediately to do that. But what about the other four?
 Well, if he -- if he goes within the 80 days and immediately files to pursue in State court his unexhausted claims, the statute is tolled. He doesn't lose the statute.
 Even without going back to the State court, I don't see anything in this statute which indicates that Congress expected everybody who comes into Federal court with unexhausted claims to have time to remedy that defect by running back to State court and -- and filing. This statute doesn't give any such indication. And it's clear that will never happen if he files on the 364th day after the conclusion of the State proceedings. Right? I mean, his year is up already. Even if the judge decides the question the next morning, it's too late. So I -- I don't know why we have to be concerned about giving him some entitled second chance to go back to -- to State court. I don't see anything in the statute that -- that guarantees or that even envisions that. And I -- I --
 I'm sorry, Your Honor.
 But I don't agree with that you were saying or you do agree with that, I know. The -- but the -- the question that I would have is, is there anything the other way? I mean, in Duncan, you know, I was dissenting and the thing that sort of moved me is I couldn't imagine Congress really cared about this. I mean, what they do is they want to have you file within a year. And they say, well, but if you filed within a year and you're in State court, we don't care anymore. You're being -- if you file in the wrong State court, you're tolled. We don't really care once you're proceeding. And now, however, if you go in -- into Federal court by mistake instead of State court by mistake, well, you're out of luck on a random basis. Some judges will get you back in on time. Other judges won't. Is there anything in the history or anywhere -- I -- I'm interested in the history from your point of view, as much as the other. Is there anything that suggests that Congress cared about that?
 Not that I've found, Your Honor.
 Either way.
 If that's so, then why isn't a system like the one that the Second Circuit described the most reasonable thing to do, that is, to put very tight deadlines both on the petitioner and on the Federal court, that is, to deny -- deny the stay and abey when the prisoner has not been diligent, to put a tight time line on when that prisoner has to go to State court, and a similarly tight line on returning to the Federal court after the State court is done? And you could check against repeatedly abusing this by saying, and you get only one opportunity to do it.
 I think the answer to the question, Your Honor, is that in order to follow the Second Circuit as you've described, this Court would have to rewrite the interpretation of the exhaustion statute that they issued in Rose v. Lundy. That's my belief because Rose v. Lundy -- or the statute, as interpreted by Rose v. Lundy indicates that at a minimum, the unexhausted claims ought to be dismissed without prejudice and sent back for exhaustion in State court.
 But Rose and Lundy also assumed that they could go back to State court and -- and in -- in fact this could be done without wiping out the claims. And the difference between the situation in Rose and Lundy and the situation we've got now is the difference which is focused, I think, in -- in Justice Ginsburg's four claims as to which there was disagreement even between the district court and -- and the State as to whether there was exhaustion. There -- there isn't a -- a -- as a -- as a systemic matter across the United States, there simply isn't a way for most of these people to go back and litigate their State claims. Rose and Lundy assumed there was. Now there isn't.
 Your Honor, if the petitioner is not capable of going back to litigate the State claim, the claim is not unexhausted by definition. And --
 It may not be -- it -- it will be waived. I mean, if -- if -- on your theory, he -- he jumps from the frying pan of nonexhaustion into the fire of waiver. That's -- that's no answer to the problem.
 See, you could -- there are two things in Rose v. Lundy, and everybody agrees with the one, you must exhaust in State court. You cannot have the Federal court take a first view of that question. You -- you must exhaust. And -- but then Rose v. Lundy also said without prejudice, and your reading strikes out without prejudice not based on the defendant's conduct, not based on the petitioner's conduct, but because it took the district court more than the limitation period just to sort out which claims were exhausted and which weren't.
 I think there are two responses to that, Your Honor. First of all, the -- the fact of whether it is without prejudice in fact or in law is driven by how much time is left on the statute of limitations. A dismissal without prejudice at the time the amended petition was filed in this case would have left 80 days on the statute and he could have pursued his -- his remedy in State court and tolled the statute. Now, in the -- in the more common situation with the habeas petitioner, I think the answer has to be Congress has changed the landscape. They have changed the landscape relying upon the total exhaustion rule in -- that they enacted and that this Court has interpreted. And they have added the statute of limitations and they've added the tolling provisions, and that has to be entered into the computation. Now, I think that that simply raises the bar for all petitioners to make doubly sure that if they have a claim, they have presented it to a State court judge because they -- they --
 Well, the -- the troublesome thing is some petitioners will be able to do just what you said in South Dakota, go back to the State court a second time, because they had a swift district judge, and some won't because the district judge was slow. So to treat identically situated petitioners differently not because of any lapse on the petitioner's part but solely because one had the luck to get before a swift district judge and the other, the bad luck to get before a procrastinator, that seems arbitrary and not anything that Congress built into the statute.
 Your Honor, I -- I struggle with the -- one of the premises of your hypothetical, and the portion I struggle with is the -- is the situation where the petitioner, through no fault of his own, either -- and I think that's implied in your hypothetical -- doesn't go to State court. I -- I think that that is -- I think that that's the --
 No, did go. Did. Every one of these cases, I say if they came rushing to the Federal court first, no Federal judge would even consider giving them a stay so they can go to the first -- first time. But these -- these come up where someone has gone to the State court and then they come to the Federal court with a new petition and there's arguments about what they exhausted and what they didn't. I'm -- I'm leaving out the person who never went to the Federal -- State court at all. That person is -- is not the category that this case represents. This case represents the one who goes to State court and comes to the Federal court and has arguably some additional claims.
 The -- there's the -- the difficulty in the stay and abeyance procedure, as it is currently practiced, I think, is that there is no set of standards, other than the three statutes that we've -- that we have discussed, to guide the district court's discretion in when they give stay and abeyance.
 General Long, do -- do those States that apply stay and abey make a distinction between whether the person who comes with unexhausted claims has exhausted some claims in State court and ones who haven't?
 Well, I think the predicate to getting stay and abeyance, Your Honor, is that there has to be at least the presence of one exhausted claim and one unexhausted --
 Why should that be?
 Well, I think that that follows from -- I think that follows from Rose v. Lundy which talked about a mixed petition and that's the -- that's the factual background.
 If you get a second bite, why shouldn't you get a first bite? I mean, I -- I don't see -- I don't see any reason for treating preferentially the -- the person who files in State court but does not file new claims, which he should have known to file at that time, and treating the person who comes to the Federal court with those new claims but doesn't have -- doesn't have even one that he took to State court. I -- I don't see any reason to be merciful to one and not the other.
 Well, I think the --
 The -- the --
 But you're -- but you're telling me the States do draw a distinction.
 Well, I don't think --
 I mean -- I mean --
 -- it's not distinction. I'm sorry. The Federal court --
 Well, hasn't the second --
 But the difference is that one of those petitions could be totally dismissed and the other one would not be. If there were no exhaustion whatsoever, they -- they'd plainly dismiss the Federal case.
 I think so, yes, Your Honor.
 Whereas, if there's one exhausted claim, they could -- they could keep the Federal -- petition in Federal court and stay it and let the unexhausted claim be exhausted.
 Well, that's -- that's the -- it's the stay that we're having the problem with, Justice Stevens. But -- but if there is the presence of one unexhausted claim, the -- the total exhaustion requirement --
 And the judge could dismiss the others.
 He -- he can dismiss the unexhausted one and move forward. And -- and, of course, what has happened in the -- since the -- the landscape has changed since 1982 and because now the 1-year statute and the tolling provisions, there is more sanction for that dismissal under the total exhaustion requirement than there used to be.
 General Long, if you were designing a system to set standards to guide the Federal judge in deciding how to treat these, what standards would you set?
 That's a hard question, Your Honor, because --
 Do your best. (Laughter.)
 I -- I think this, Your Honor. I -- I think the court, faced with a mixed petition, ought to first ask why have you not -- if -- if there is truly an unexhausted claim in this petition, why did you not present that claim previously in State court. And after that, if -- if the -- if the answer to that is not satisfactory, I think that the -- I think that that ought to be tested on, for example, the cause and prejudice standard or the actual innocence or fundamental miscarriage of justice standards which this Court has announced to cure procedural defaults in extreme cases. But in the absence of those type of standards, I think that stay and abeyance has been simply applied too broadly and this case is a classic example of the misapplication of stay and abeyance.
 Well, are you suggesting then that we could have a rule, oh, somewhat like the grant of a preliminary injunction? If it's a likelihood of success on the merits, if it's a fundamental right, if there's reason for maybe mistake and not having exhausted, then -- then you'd allow a stay and abeyance?
 Well, I --
 Because if you have that, we then have a new Gothic jurisprudence where we're reviewing discretion on a collateral issue.
 Well, but --
 Rococo I think.
 Well, the -- the difficulty with the way it is now, Your Honor, is there is no review of the discretion of the district courts at all. I mean, they simply do it, and --
 Well, I suppose the suggestion I made --
 -- and it's --
 -- is preferable than the one I gave. Would you adopt that or would you insist just that there be no stay and abey at all?
 Well, our first position, obviously, is no stay and abey at all, that the unexhausted claims ought to be dismissed, as the Eighth Circuit said in this case. And if they -- if they are truly unexhausted, then there is going to be a remedy in State court, and State courts are perfectly capable of identifying constitutional remedies and -- and meting out the requirements. I've had -- I've had South Dakota judges send murder cases back to me to try after 12 years, and it's -- it's a burdensome thing, and those cases need to move forward. But what I would envision, Justice Kennedy, is this, that the rule ought to be that -- that the -- the -- that the case is sent back to State court if there is truly, as -- as the name implies, an unexhausted claim, implying that there is an available State remedy. If -- if resolution in the State courts does not resolve it, if the case comes back in some fashion, then the court needs to apply some standards like cause and prejudice or fundamental miscarriage of justice, which -- which is what is applied in -- in procedural default cases, and -- and deal with it on that basis. But the -- the current lack of discretion with reference to how stay and abeyance is applied is in my judgment the -- that is the -- that is the most fundamental problem with --
 But again --
 -- stay and abeyances.
 -- I come -- I come back to the -- the Second Circuit tried to deal with that problem and why isn't that adequate? They didn't leave the district judges to do whatever was their will.
 The -- well, the -- the Second Circuit followed very closely to what the -- what the district court did here, Your Honor, but what I did not see in the Second Circuit opinions and frankly haven't seen in any of the opinions except the Eighth Circuit opinion was any type of analysis about an explanation of why the petitioner hadn't been prudent and hadn't been diligent in State court. And -- and in the absence of any kind of inquiry like that, I think that stay and abeyance simply is -- is -- it's unguided. There are no standards. If there are no questions, thank you very much.
 Thank you, General Long. Mr. Lange, you have 7 minutes left, and normally I wouldn't intrude on your rebuttal time, but I would like to ask you to comment on one thought. Do you think it would be appropriate before a district judge ever grants a stay and -- and abeyance procedure, to make some kind of a preliminary, not exactly a probable cause determination, but some kind of a determination as to whether or not there is arguable merit to the State claim that he wants to stay the proceedings to -- to allow him to exhaust?
 Yes, I do, Justice Stevens. I believe that a district court, in evaluating a request for stay and abeyance, should look to make sure that the petition meets the standards of section 2254(b)(2) which is the provision that allows a district court to reach the merits of unexhausted claims to deny them. It's similar to what the Court has now promulgated as rule 4 of the rules governing habeas corpus cases. I think it makes sense for the district court first to look at -- at whether there's merit to the petition because there really is no sense to hold in abeyance, pending exhaustion in State court, claims that lack merit. Obviously, to get stay and abeyance, the petitioner will have had to file timely within his AEDPA period, and the court will have had to have held the case either through the expiration of the AEDPA period or you can imagine some scenarios where on the 364th day --
 Well, it's one thing to say that there's -- it's utterly without merit and he can deny it, which he's entitled to do under the statute. It's another thing to say that there's a high probability of success on the merits. I'm afraid that most of the claims are going to fall in between. The district judge just doesn't know absent testimony, et cetera, et cetera.
 Right, and those should be circumstances where the State court is left to judge whether the claim has merit while the Federal court proceedings are suspended, are abeyed or held in abeyance. It makes sense, under the exhaustion norms of this Court, to let the State courts pass judgment first on claims that have sufficient merit where they can't be disposed of under rule 4 of the rules governing habeas corpus.
 Mr. -- Mr. Lange, why -- why isn't -- gee, you have Lange and Long. Why isn't Attorney General Long's assertion sensible? That is to say, it's an extraordinary thing to have Federal district courts in all criminal cases reviewing the work of State supreme courts. We -- we got into this in an era when we couldn't trust State supreme courts, especially in racial cases. But that's where we are now. But why is it unreasonable to say, look, you get one shot at coming to Federal court? And if -- if you -- if you bungle that and you haven't exhausted first, we're not denying your claims. Go back to State court. We're just not going to reintervene as Federal courts. Your -- your claims are not dead. Justice is not denied. You just have to go back through the State system and we're not going to blue pencil the work of the State system a second time. That's all. Why isn't that reasonable?
 Well, this is Mr. Rhines' one opportunity. Congress did give in section 2254(a) jurisdiction to the courts and said the Federal courts shall entertain petitions of this -- of this nature. So this is a -- a right that Mr. Rhines has to have these entertained. He filed timely.
 Well, to have exhausted claims entertained. Right? Is there some -- do you say there is some absolute right to have the Federal court hear unexhausted claims?
 Well, under (b)(1), a claim must be exhausted to support relief from a Federal court. That is right, Your Honor. And these claims -- if under the petitioner B scenario, the court had ruled promptly or the claims were less complex, allowing them to be disposed of earlier, Mr. Rhines could have had or -- and should have all of his claims before the district court to be resolved. The Court needs to be watchful here not to penalize Mr. Rhines and people who are in similar situations because they have complex claims.
 Well, this is not a pro se petitioner.
 No. He is represented by counsel, obviously, Your Honor. I -- I think it inappropriate to draw lines between pro se and represented counsel, though, in the realm of habeas. That I think invites trouble. So the rule you formulate is obviously not only for Rhines but for pro se litigants as well that -- that deserve consideration. This exhaustion rule is not to be an -- a trap for the unwary pro se petitioner. The whole purpose of the exhaustion rule, as this Court said in Keeney v. Tamayo-Reyes, is to -- not to erect a hurdle on the path to Federal habeas court, but to channel claims into an appropriate forum. And stay and abeyance does just that. It prohibits further proceeding on a mixed petition in Federal court and channels, indeed requires, as a term of the order that the petitioner go and exhaust the remaining State remedy and come back to court with one exhausted claim. That is what Rose v. Lundy contemplated and allowed with the dismissal without prejudice.
 Earlier you -- you suggested that in your view the district court could deny it.
 If under section 2254(b)(2) it does not meet the standard, yes. Congress has allowed, because exhaustion is not jurisdictional, for district courts to reach the merits, albeit to deny unexhausted claims. That's --
 Mr. Lange, you were appointed by the Court, and on behalf of the Court, I want to thank you for your services and for the quality of your services.
 Thank you.
 The case is submitted.
 We will hear argument in Shepard against the United States. Ms. Thompson.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This case involves the proper application of the categorical method of analysis that this Court prescribed in Taylor against United States, and it involves the application of that categorical method to what is described as ambiguous burglary convictions obtained under nongeneric burglary statutes with boiler plate complaints and a general finding of guilty following a plea proceeding. At stake --
 What -- what do you mean by a -- just so we get our terms defined, what do you mean by a nongeneric burglary statute --
 In this case --
 -- and a generic burglary statute?
 Well, a generic burglary statute, as -- as defined in the Taylor case is one that criminalizes unlawful entry into a building or a structure with intent to commit another crime. Those are the three elements of generic burglary. Those apply if any -- if a State statute covers those three, it's considered generic burglary and would then qualify as a predicate violent felony under the Armed Career Criminal Act. A nongeneric --
 Now, do you -- do you agree that all the papers showing the arrest and the investigation and so forth show that this was in fact a building --
 No.
 -- that was burglarized?
 I do not. I -- as this --
 Does it show it was a vehicle?
 It doesn't show that it was a vehicle.
 Or a boat?
 It doesn't show that it was a boat.
 Or a motorcycle?
 It doesn't show that it was a motorcycle.
 It shows nothing? None of the supporting documentation shows what it was?
 Those supporting documents do not play a role in the adjudication.
 Well, that isn't my question. I asked you whether any of them show that it was, in fact, a building or a car or a boat.
 None of them shows that it was anything other than a building.
 Thank you.
 The police reports and the complaint applications, but the statute --
 Well, why -- why are you resisting that the -- that the police report gave an identified building? I mean, you're -- you're saying that one mustn't look behind, in the case of a guilty plea, to find the police report or even the police application for complaint. But there isn't any question, is there, that the police reports in fact gave addresses of particular buildings?
 There is no question of that. When you look at the police reports, if you read those police reports, some of which you can actually read, they do describe buildings and they describe addresses and hallways and things like that.
 So what -- what you're saying is the conviction itself didn't show that, and so the question is whether you can look to documents that in fact showed it.
 That's -- that's correct, Justice Ginsburg.
 So the rule you would have us follow does result in a -- a super technicality in a sense of what -- what was on the record at the time of the plea.
 Well, actually the district court established that this was not on the record at the time of the plea. The district court took evidence on this issue. The statutes to -- that are underlying these convictions, to get back to Justice Scalia's question, are nongeneric, and they are nongeneric in the sense that they make it unlawful to break into structures other than buildings or in addition to buildings.
 Suppose -- suppose in the earlier conviction, the police report is in the court. It's not part of the record, and then the court says, I've read the police report. Is that accurate? And the client -- or the defendant says, yes. Then later, can we go back and look at the police report even though it was not annexed as part of the record?
 Well, that calls into question what kinds of documents can be examined in terms of making a -- a determination as to whether this offense was categorically a crime of violence, that is, that it was generic burglary. It's our position that there's a limitation, and the limitation is imposed by Taylor itself, that the question being answered be made a question of law, that it is a question of law, that it's a matter of law that you make the determination.
 But if the defendant at the plea colloquy had said, yes, I entered X building or even in the plea bargain had said that, even though the charge just read the boiler plate, the whole statute, buildings, vessels, et cetera, if he had admitted it either in the plea colloquy or in the plea bargain, wouldn't that be enough?
 If we had a contemporaneous record of the adjudication of this conviction that showed an actual admission to breaking into a building, I believe that that would satisfy a sort of modified Taylor categorical approach.
 I -- I don't understand your reading of Taylor. As I've read that case many times, it seemed to me that that was making a perfectly sensible point. At the end of the opinion, Justice Blackmun says, you know, there are some States like Massachusetts, for example, that instead of just saying burglary, they say burglary of a -- of a ship or a car or a building. And that leads us to answer a more general question. Well, in context, that more general question is whether you ought to go look into how a particular burglary was committed to see if there was really violence or not. And he says no. Just look to the definition of the crime. That's what he says. That will end it. Now, he says we agree, because I started here, that we have a couple of States with some weird statutes, and what you have to do in those States is you won't know if it's a boat or a car or -- so he says, for example, in a State like the one we have, if it shows it's charged us with a burglary and you have to find out, you know, here's what you do. It says you may have to go beyond the mere fact of conviction. So he says go look to the indictment or information and jury instructions. That isn't a limiting phrase. That's for example. He just thought that in those cases, that's what -- all you'll have to look to, for example. We happen to have an unusual case where there are no jury instructions because he pled guilty. So what's the harm of going looking to the documents that will show, in an uncontested way, just what the address on these pieces of paper show? There are no boats, you know, in Watertown. It's not a dock, I don't think, or at least not in that part of it. So -- so I mean, what's the problem here?
 Well, the --
 Why is everyone so mixed up? I must be missing something.
 The example that's given, the charging document and jury instructions -- let's suppose that instead of -- of guilty pleas, Mr. Shepard was tried and he was tried on this nongeneric, boiler plate complaint, and there were no jury instructions available.
 What's the problem? I grant you I could imagine a case that could be a problem. Maybe it was a houseboat. Okay? (Laughter.)
 Or maybe it's like a trailer. So if we run into that case, we'll deal with it. You know, I'm perfectly capable of thinking that if this is a charge where there is a dispute on the contested point, fine, we won't take that dispute into account, maybe decide it in the favor of the defendant, maybe. But this is not that case. And by the way, if he's going to say, how do you know? I'd say, I know. I know Boston and I also know that breaking into a boat at least is unusual. So if he thinks it wasn't that, let him say so.
 The district court did actually entertain this issue, Justice Breyer, and what they -- what the district court found was there wasn't an opportunity, there wasn't a reason for Mr. Shepard to contest building or any other element of this offense.
 No, of course, there wasn't. So all he has to do now is say, Judge, in my latest thing, you know, they say 30 Bremer Street. 30 Bremer Street sounds like the address of a building, but by the way, unusually enough, it's the license plate of a car. Now, if in fact that's the case, he can come in and say it. There's no Fifth Amendment problem. We're talking about sentencing and what a prior conviction was. He doesn't even have to say it. You as his lawyer could tell us. Now, you know why I think you don't say it? Because it isn't conceivably right.
 Well, and it also isn't in fact. And the question here is --
 What do you mean it isn't right in fact? What is it?
 Is it in law --
 Yes.
 -- or in fact that we are trying to make this determination?
 We look to facts about what the prior convictions were about. That's what Taylor says. That, of course, is a fact, but it's a legal fact, what was this conviction for.
 Taylor said you don't look at facts --
 I understand your reading of it. What I want to know is what's wrong with my reading of it.
 Because your reading of it requires a look at the underlying conduct. It actually requires. And the document here that was selected to exhibit the underlying conduct is as far away as you can get from an adjudicatory document.
 All right. What -- is -- is your argument that we are likely, in effect, to -- to violate some constitutional standard if we do what the Government wants, or is your argument as follows? That Taylor says this is an offense-based not a fact-based determination. Taylor says that's what the statute is getting at. And if you go as far as the Government wants here, you basically will have gone beyond offense-based. You will have gone -- become fact-based and you will be violating the statute. So my question is, is there something constitutionally we have to worry about which is the basis for your argument, or is it a violation of the statute that you think we ought to be worried about?
 In this case it's the statute that was violated, but you are correct, Justice Souter --
 Well, I don't have a position. I can't --
 -- that -- no. You are correct in representing that the Government's approach to this will take what is quintessentially a question of law, that is, a comparison of adjudicated elements of -- adjudicated elements of conviction against -- compared to the elements of generic burglary. That's a question of law. Do they match? Do they not match? It becomes a question of fact then, as the First Circuit put it in Shepard and in the Harris case, to determine what was actually in the mind of the defendant at the time he entered his plea.
 Well, aren't we asking that question in -- in any case? The question ultimately is, what did he mean when he said I am guilty? If you've got a plea colloquy, as you admitted a moment ago, it's easy to find out what he meant because they would have gone into the factual basis for the plea. If there's a written plea agreement, it's probably going to be easy to find out because, again, there would be a basis for the plea set out. Here, there isn't one of those documents. So you're going one step further, but you're still asking the question what did he mean when he stood in that courtroom and said I am guilty. And yes, in -- in one sense that's fact-based, but all of those questions are fact-based. They're going to the same issue. What did he mean? What was pleading guilty to? Isn't that correct?
 Well, because it's based on an examination of the underlying conduct, which is forbidden by the Taylor decision --
 Well, maybe, maybe not. That's kind of the question we have, how -- what gloss to put on Taylor.
 Suppose --
 Do you join the amici in saying Almendarez-Torres has to be overruled?
 No, I do not.
 No.
 I do not join --
 But suppose --
 All right. So we're looking --
 -- Taylor were not on the books. What -- what would be the basis of your argument? You say that it's all right to look at a plea colloquy, but it's not all right to look at an arrest report to which the judge referred. What's the basis for that distinction? What sense does it make?
 The sense it makes it this. What the Armed Career Criminal Act addresses and what this Court discussed in Taylor was the applicable term is conviction, that is, a conviction for a categorical offense. The categorical offense is a crime of violence specifically described as burglary, arson, but there are specifically described crimes. Those are things that you can determine as a matter of law. Do the elements match the -- the generically violent crime, or do they not match the generically violent crime? If they do not match the generically violent crime, you might still be able to figure out, you might be able to surmise what the defendant actually had in his mind, if he had anything in his mind, about this at the time of the guilty plea. Well, one of the unique things about the -- these nongeneric burglary statutes in Massachusetts is that they're really relatively petty offenses.
 But -- but why can you look at what's in the plea colloquy that's in the record, but you cannot look at a document that the judge referred to, if that document isn't there? What's -- what's the common sense argument that you're making? I -- I don't understand it.
 Well, there is no evidence in this case that the judge referred to a police report.
 No. This is my little hypothetical case so that we can test your theory, just to see the reasons that you're advancing for -- for us to rule in your favor. And I -- I don't see any rationale that you've given us.
 If you can look at the colloquy and the judge, without incorporating it, has the defendant explicitly admit the facts that constitute the elements of generic burglary, it is our position that that -- that conviction could be used to enhance. But --
 Let me try the same question.
 But -- but why can't you go one step further and refer to the document that was not in the record but that the judge mentioned in his -- in his findings at the first sentencing? Why? I still haven't had a reason why.
 I agree that whether or not that document is in the record, if there is an explicit finding or an admission by the court that enters the judgment, that the defendant broke and entered a building, that that conviction should be able to qualify as a predicate under the Armed Career Criminal Act. It is not a requirement that the underlying document be incorporated into the record, only that the admission be made or the facts be found by the fact-finder, whoever is taking the plea.
 May I ask you a question? Assume the case had been tried and you could not tell from either the indictment or the instructions to the jury whether it was a generic burglary or a nongeneric burglary. Would the -- our decision permit us to look at the transcript of the trial to answer that question?
 Certainly not under Taylor. The whole idea of Taylor was partly dictated by the words of the statute.
 So your argument is that this is comparable to using the transcript of the trial.
 This is -- it -- well, I don't think it's comparable because the district court finding was that the documents that the Government relies on were not involved in the adjudication at all. So it --
 So this is even farther removed.
 This is even farther removed than a plea colloquy, farther removed than a trial transcript looking into the evidence --
 But that's what I don't understand. We're now talking about that part of Taylor which deals with a narrow statute where our object is not to find out what he's guilty of or anything. We're just trying to find out what was the crime he was charged with. And there are two or three States which lump together in one statute crimes that are violent and nonviolent. Burglary of a structure is violent. Burglary of a car or a ship is not. So all we want to know is what was the charge at issue. Now, do you -- let me break the question into two parts. The key sentence here, I think, is for example, in a State whose burglary statutes include entry of an automobile, as well as a building, if the indictment or information and jury instructions show that the defendant was charged only with burglary of a building, then it's going to be violent. Now, would you -- would you agree with me or not that he could have written -- Justice Blackmun -- that same sentence to say if, for example, the indictment or information and jury instructions show? Would you be willing to add those two words, for example?
 If, for example.
 If, for example. I want to know how -- how absolute you're making this. If, for example. And the next question I'd ask would be if you agree for example, what are the things you can look to and what are the things you can't?
 And I -- I do agree that that's one of the questions presented by this case.
 Yes, but do you want add the for example or do you want to take it just categorically?
 Well, I do believe that the best reading is the categorical reading.
 Yes.
 But I'm willing to accept for example --
 Okay. Then what kinds of things would you --
 -- for purposes of argument.
 -- let us look to and what kinds of things not? All we're interested in is what was he charged with, which of these three things.
 And all Taylor and the Armed Career Criminal Act are interested in is what was he convicted of.
 No, no, no. I will get that later. Let me deal with the charge. If he was charged with breaking into a boat, that's the end of this. Okay?
 True.
 So, fine. So I want to know what he was charged with. Let me do that one. Now, what will you let me look to to see what he was charged with?
 You can look to the charging document and the statute to see what he was charged with.
 All right. So what happens in the case where -- Justice Blackmun let us go further than that. He says the indictment -- that's the charging document -- or information and jury instruction. He'll let us look to a jury instruction as if there's actually been a trial. So he'll let us go further than you will.
 Not to determine what he was charged with. To determine what he was convicted of. Because the jury instructions are not going to be factually oriented. The jury instructions are going to tell you what the element of the crime was, elements that were adjudicated. So that if you have the person charged with a nongeneric document here -- the nongeneric statute, a boat, a house, a whatever, and the jury instructions establish for you that he could not have been convicted by that jury without finding a house because that's the elements laid out in the jury instruction --
 And what's the difference between that and a police report that makes it quite clear that in the circumstances there was no possibility of a boat or a car being involved? What's the difference between that and the police report?
 The police report does not show you what the results of the adjudication was. It does not establish --
 No. What shows us that -- what shows us that is --
 The elements.
 -- is the check mark. No. The check mark on the form that says, for example, plea, admit sufficient facts. You know, that's a check mark or it's on the form. It says plea, guilty. I mean, you know, you could have different things checked. So that's what established the guilt. And then the police report establishes whether -- what kind of a thing was at issue. And I will agree with you that if it's at all contested, we shouldn't get into it. But if it's not contested, there's no question. There was no boat around there. It's a city street. Or there was no car. It's plain it was a building. Then that's just as good as the jury instruction. Why not? Tell me why not.
 Well, I suggest that it doesn't tell you anything about what's actually been adjudicated. What it tells you, it's what's actually been charged. And here's one of the things that came up in the district court in front of Judge Gertner, and the Government brought up this as well as Judge -- as the district court judge. What if Mr. Shepard went in and said, yes, I broke into the property of another person with intent to commit a crime? That would be a factual basis that would be adequate for the -- for any sentence that could be imposed under that statute. Because the -- because of the fact that the boat, the house, the car, and the vessel are all put on the same level, the operative fact is is it yours, Mr. Shepard. Does that belong to you, Mr. Shepard?
 I mean, but that's always true. You could have a -- you could have a -- a sheet that shows: admitted, assault, you know. And -- and what the sheet says, it says: charge, assault; plea, guilty. It's possible, for all we know, that when the actual colloquy took place, he was talking about some other thing. I don't know what he was talking about, but what you'd go upon is that there was a charge and he pleaded guilty to the charge.
 Which brings me to Henderson against Morgan. One of the issues in Henderson against Morgan is whether or not you can infer guilt of an element that is not specifically charged even from overwhelming evidence, that that could be proved.
 I -- I don't -- good. Are you going to explain this? Because I thought what we were supposed to do is just look to the sheet, charge; the plea, guilty. And that is what we do and it disposes of 98 percent of the cases.
 It does.
 All right. So -- so are you talking about those 98 percent now?
 I'm talking about the -- the 2 percent that are nongeneric burglary. And in those 2 percent that are nongeneric burglary, the issue that is raised, by the fact that it's nongeneric burglary, is you can't make a determination based on the face of the record of what was actually adjudicated, that this person was actually found guilty of each element of generic burglary. And when you cannot make that determination from record documents and contemporaneous documents with the adjudication, then you cannot make that determination under the Armed Career Criminal Act.
 Why can't you make the determination? Isn't the -- the problem that your determination may not be as reliable? And I thought ultimately your argument would boil down to saying this. The reason you will accept the plea colloquy or the plea agreement, if it sets out the facts, is that that is very reliable. It is a reliable indication of what he was pleading guilty to and what the court was finding him guilty of. But once you go beyond that and you start looking into police reports appended to complaints or whatnot, you're getting into an area of less reliability, and when we're dealing with sentence enhancements like this, we better be reliable. That's why the statute based it on -- on offense rather than facts. Don't get into a factual determination that is unreliable. I thought that was your argument ultimately.
 That -- that is part of the argument, and I -- I think that we're just using different terms here. You're using offense, and -- and the Taylor court and the -- and the Armed Career Criminal Act use conviction.
 I -- I'll accept that, yes.
 Okay. And so when you're talking about a conviction, you're talking about something that has already been established, that you should be able to make a determination by looking at the contemporaneous documents.
 But you -- you still haven't given a reason, other than the one Justice Souter accepts. Look it. This is a case where we all know what the truth is, but you want to argue that we shouldn't find that out. And it seems to me you have to give us a rationale for we shouldn't know the truth here. You -- you don't want us to find it, and there must be some reasons for that. And the law does that once in a while. We all know that something happened, but the law is supposed to pretend it didn't. That's why Justice has a blindfold on. I -- I know that. But you haven't given me one reason yet why I should adopt your theory.
 Well, the theory that I'm proposing is -- is I believe the theory that's already been adopted by this Court, which is the -- the one described in Taylor. It's the categorical approach that says you cannot make a determination of what elements were adjudicated by looking at the underlying conduct.
 But why is a categorical determination important? I threw you a -- a bone a second ago, and I said maybe it's because of --
 It's --
 -- a reliability concern. Is that it? Is that your point?
 It is reliable and it's also not fact-based. Once you start to --
 No, but is -- is your point that once you get beyond the documents that you admit we can look at, there is a higher -- an -- an unacceptably high risk of unreliability? Is that your argument?
 That is one of my arguments, Justice Souter, and the -- and there's something that goes hand in glove with that and did in this case. The burden shifts then to the defendant. The burden shifts to the defendant to prove that he was not convicted of generic burglary, and that --
 Well, but that -- that doesn't necessarily follow.
 -- assignment --
 But that doesn't necessarily follow from -- from looking at a police report. It may well be that we would say the burden never shifts, and he is simply in the position of any other party to a case. If -- if the other side has put in evidence that is -- is against his interest and he does nothing, then he's in trouble. But that isn't the same as shifting the burden.
 Well, it --
 There's no -- I guess all I'm saying is it doesn't follow from the argument that the Government is making that a burden of persuasion shifts. Isn't that correct?
 What shifts is the risk of being wrong. The shifts -- the risk of being wrong right now is on the Government. If the Government cannot establish that the defendant was convicted of generic burglary, it bears that responsibility. If the defendant cannot establish that back when he entered his plea --
 Yes, but the Government --
 Ms. Thompson, you know your white light is on. So if you want to save time, you should perhaps do so right now.
 I would. Thank you very much.
 Mr. Elwood.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: When a defendant has been convicted under a State statute that prohibits both burglary of a building and burglary of a car or some other item, the Court can still look to the conviction to determine whether it is an Armed Career Criminal Act predicate when, as here, the police report indicates the defendant was arrested for burglarizing a building rather than a ship or a car and the other documents in the file corroborate that the basis for the plea was the crime outlined in the police report. Because two of the three elements of generic burglary -- that is, breaking and entering and intent to commit a crime --
 May I ask this question? Suppose the police report had been ambiguous and referred to both a boat and a house. What would -- could -- would it be -- what would you do in that case?
 I think in a case where the police report was ambiguous about what it is that the person broke into, I think that you could not base the enhancement on that. We are asking only when both the police report is unambiguous and the documents recording the guilty plea suggest --
 But why -- why couldn't you use it in the other case? Couldn't you ask the police officer what he -- who conducted the investigation what the facts really were?
 I think you might be able to --
 And you'd start out with the premise that 90 percent of these cases are really houses anyway, so there's a strong presumption in favor of the Government?
 I -- I think that you could talk about introducing extrinsic evidence of -- of that sort. We're not asking the Court to go that far, and I think in the run-up cases --
 So the -- the question in this case is whether a police report is extrinsic evidence, isn't it?
 I don't think so in this case because the police report is in -- in a police file itself.
 Well, suppose that it was an assault and battery, for example, and you're trying to decide whether it was violent or not, and the police report was somewhat ambiguous. Could you -- you couldn't look at it then.
 No, and I don't think you could for an additional reason, which is that I don't think assault and battery is necessarily a -- is a necessary element of the -- of -- of -- I'm sorry.
 There's a distinction between violent assaults and --
 Right, violent and nonviolent.
 -- nonviolent assaults.
 Exactly right.
 And you might want to find out which one it was and -- and as here, it seems pretty easy. Everybody knows most burglaries are -- are of houses. But I'm just wondering if we're not trying to find out what the categorical rule is that -- that is at stake here.
 The only rule we are advocating is that when we are talking about a necessary element of the offense that can be satisfied in different ways, that you can look to the police report to indicate which way it was met in this case if the rest of the file, the State court file, indicates that the police report was the -- provided the factual basis or provided the basis for the conviction. And I think if you look at the file in this case, for example, for four of the defendant's --
 Well, you say it provided the basis for the conviction. Was it presented to the court in each of these cases?
 We believe that the record indicates that it was. For four of the defendant's convictions, if you look at the document that records the guilty plea, it -- it says -- in addition to the notation of guilty, and as Justice Breyer averred, a check of admit sufficient facts or that there are sufficient facts present, it lists the same date of the offense, the same street address, the same arresting officer, and the same victim. And it is our submission that that implies certainly very strongly -- it supports a very strong inference -- that the crime of conviction was the very same crime that is described in the police report.
 I thought Judge Gertner said she didn't know whether anybody had seen this police report. It wasn't attached to the charge. I thought that was her position, that these are untested documents. We don't know one way or another whether the judge that accepted the plea had seen them.
 To begin with, Judge Gertner looked only to -- she didn't draw any inference based on the document recording the guilty plea and what happened. She looked only to the direct evidence of what happened in the colloquy, i.e., the petitioner's affidavit. But even more than that, her only finding was that the police report, as a police report, was not introduced at the plea colloquy. It wasn't marked as an exhibit. It wasn't attached to anything. It wasn't introduced as that. I don't think that's inconsistent with the idea that as is often the case and is probably usually the case, that the police report was synopsized by the prosecutor and -- and read at court, which would explain why the offense of conviction has the same offense date, same street address, same victim, same arresting officer.
 But we don't have any colloquy. We don't know what happened at the -- you're saying it's -- it's altogether likely that that happened, but we don't know.
 But we do know that under Massachusetts State law, that there -- before a court can accept a guilty plea, there has to be a factual basis in the record. There have to be facts in the record to support every element of the offense.
 So if the defendant says, yes, I plead guilty to this crime and the crime is described as ship, vessel, car, building, and that's -- if that's all that happened is the boiler plate charge that just repeats the statute and the defendant says, yes, I did that, but nothing tells us did what, other than violate the statute.
 The requirement -- the factual basis requirement requires a statement of the facts, not a statement of the legal conclusion, and simply reading the charging document as a legal conclusion about what it -- about a boat, building, et cetera was broken into. What it requires is a narrative description of the underlying conduct so that the judge can satisfy him or herself to what the defendant is pleading guilty to is actually a crime. If he just says, I agree with the charging document, if the underlying facts were he broke into a grocery cart or a -- a refrigerator shipping box or something, it might not satisfy the elements of the crime.
 But couldn't the judge in that colloquy have said to him, did you break into a building, a car, or a boat? And he would have said yes, and wouldn't that have satisfied the element of the crime?
 I don't -- I don't think it would have satisfied the factual basis requirement in that there has to be a narrative description of what the defendant did, like he showed up at that day and he broke into 258 Norwell Street. And I have yet to find a Massachusetts case where a -- a guilty plea was accepted based on basically just a recitation of the charging document --
 Now, there's no record here of the colloquy at the plea? Is that it?
 No. There's -- there's no facts -- there's no -- as is the case often in guilty pleas, which are not challenged on appeal, no colloquy was ever prepared and apparently the tape recording was destroyed.
 But your test is whether or not there's reliable record evidence? Is that -- that the test?
 Yes, whether there's reliable record evidence that is reliable in describing what the offense was that was the subject of the plea colloquy. And in this case, we believe it is met both because the police report is unambiguous, as several of the members of the Court have averred to, and that the documents recording the guilty plea I think very clearly indicate that the thing that was at issue was the crime described in the police report.
 Does it -- does the plea refer to the police report?
 No, it does not. It doesn't in so many words refer to the police report, but it refers to -- it -- it, I think, unambiguously describes the crimes described in the police report and that it involves, as I said, the same date, the same street address, the same victim, and the same arresting officer.
 Where do you draw the line? Is there some -- I -- I take it that you say certainly if the plea colloquy or the -- or the judge's guilt determination refers to the police report, then the police report comes in. Suppose there's no reference to the police report.
 I think that --
 Can we still go find the police report and then where do we stop?
 I think that if there's no reference to the police report and if the police report is not in the State court file, which it was in this case -- the court indicated it was in the State court file -- I -- I think that you would probably have to have a stronger showing in order to say, well, he pleaded guilty to the police report such as a -- a reference to the police report or more of an indication on the guilty plea form, a notation of -- of what was entered or --
 Well, you mentioned --
 -- something that unambiguously indicated the police report provided the factual basis for the plea.
 You -- you mentioned the State file. Is -- is the rule whatever is in the State file, even if there's no reference to it? You had -- you had two variables: one that there was reference to it; and two, that it was in State file. Suppose there's no reference, but it is in the State file. What -- I'm -- I'm not sure what rule you would draw?
 The -- if -- I -- I think that there has to be both an -- that the police report is unambiguous and that there is reason to believe or that it is more likely than not that the police report provided the factual basis for the plea, and if it's -- if there's no reference to it in so many words, I think the same could be said this -- that the same could be said here in this case. It doesn't say we look to the police report. You just draw that inference from the fact that the crime described looks like the crime described in the police report.
 So what is your -- what rule would you have here? The question is, was he convicted of a crime of violence? 98 percent of the cases, all you have to do is look to the crime charged, burglary, and the fact that he was convicted. He pleaded guilty or didn't. But there are these two -- three States I guess that lump together in one code provision for breaking and entering into a ship or a car or a house. So now we've got to know which of the three it is. If they go to trial, it's easy. Just look to the jury instructions. If they plead guilty, I guess your opponents would say that's the end of it. You can't use it because we don't ever know from the charge itself which of the three it was that was at issue. Was a house at issue? Was a car at issue? Was a boat at issue? Now, you're going to say, but do a little investigating to find out what was at issue. Look at the police report. Is your view look at anything as long as it's uncontested and clear? Their argument is no matter what you look into, once you go beyond that charging document, you're going to find I think Justice Souter's point. It's going to be ambiguous sometimes. You get into facts of things happened years ago. It's just not worth it.
 I think our argument -- or the -- the proposition that we are arguing for today is that when the documents and the State court file indicate that the defendant was arrested for only burglary of a building and there's no question that it wasn't a ship or a vehicle, that it will support the ACCA --
 Yes, but we're still going to have to write something.
 Correct. When --
 And what I want to know is what's your rule.
 Right. When the other documents in the file indicate that it is more likely than not that the police report or that that description of events served as the basis for the guilty plea.
 May I --
 So -- so we -- are we going to decide -- decide a lot of probate cases about incorporation by reference in wills and stuff?
 I -- I think --
 I don't know what we're supposed to do.
 I think that in this case it just -- I don't think the Court really has to get to the outer reaches of this because in many of these cases, it's overwhelming --
 But if we don't get to the outer reaches, the next case I suppose will involve a -- an application for a search warrant or an arrest warrant which describes facts and pretty well tells you what really happened. Could you rely on that?
 No. Because the -- the important thing is not just describing what actually happened, but what -- what happened on the day the guilty plea was taken. And that is where the documents that record the plea I think come in to show --
 Well, the police report wasn't made on that date. The police report was prepared earlier, I assume.
 The police report was prepared earlier, but when the crime -- when they wrote down guilty, the offense he was guilty of is breaking into a certain address at a certain day, belonging to a certain victim, and involving the same arresting officer. And we believe that --
 But if it's that -- if it's that explicit, I don't think you need the police report.
 Well, perhaps because you can refer to the police report.
 It seems to me we're dealing with a case in which the court documents are sufficiently ambiguous that you have to look to something else. Then the question is what other things may you look to, and you say we can look to police reports. I say why not look at warrant applications or maybe the prosecutor's notes, or there could be other equally reliable documents available, it would seem to me, that would -- which establish the facts.
 I think that you really only have to look at -- the -- the fact that these are present in the court's files and the fact that --
 I thought the police reports were not present in the court --
 They are present in the court's files. The court said they were present in the court's files. They just said they didn't become part of the plea colloquy because of --
 Well, the -- the warrant affidavit is going to be present in the files. It's -- it's returned. It's -- it's normally filed with -- with the other papers in the case.
 I think, though, that there's -- there would be no particular reason to believe that the warrant application had been -- had served as the basis for the guilty plea. I mean, if you had some sort of --
 Why -- why not? I -- I mean, are we going to imagine an entirely different case out of the blue from the one that's disclosed in -- in the warrant application? It seems to me that there's a -- a relatively high degree of probability there.
 If -- I -- I think that if the documents recording the guilty plea indicate that the -- that the crime described is the crime described in the warrant application, you probably could look at that if -- to determine if it was a boat or a building or --
 Well, let's say the warrant application says, you know, we're looking for a stolen radio and the charge does indicate that he was -- that -- that the -- that the property taken in the burglary was a -- was -- was a radio. Wouldn't that be a basis for saying, okay, the warrant application probably discloses what was going on here? If -- if the -- if it was a radio on the warrant application, a radio in the burglary charge to which he did plead guilty, probably it's the radio at the address indicated in the warrant application. Isn't that a fair inference?
 Perhaps. The -- the whole thing about the warrant application, though, strikes me as -- as a little bit more attenuated, though, also because it's done in advance of the police arriving on the scene and discovering what's going on whereas the police report --
 Well, it may be done in advance by -- you know, by -- by a couple of hours from the -- the police going in --
 Right. But still it's -- it's done beforehand as opposed to done after the crime has been investigated.
 What -- what about the -- the police officer -- what -- what if we don't have a document of any sort but the -- the State calls the police officer who, in fact, made the application for the -- the issuance of the complaint and he says, when I appeared to ask for the issuance of the complaint, I testified to, I swore to the following facts? I.e, that it was a house at such and such Shaw Street. That gives you your contemporaneity element. Why not accept that?
 I think that under a sort of a -- theoretically that's a -- that is a theoretical possibility, Justice Souter. I don't think that would happen a lot in actual practice because the sort of people who are prosecutional witnesses have a sufficient caseload that they're just never going to have in a -- a actual recollection of specific events. And I can represent to the Court that --
 They have notes. But the police all have little notebooks. That's what they use in trial day in and day out. So it seems to me that -- that if -- if contemporaneity is the -- is -- is -- or rough contemporaneity is -- is the criterion, then on your theory we ought to get into testimonial evidence.
 It's -- it's both contemporaneity, if I've said that correctly, but I think also a -- a reason to infer that it provided the basis for the plea -- for the plea colloquy, which it is in this case because --
 Well, I guess you would be content with just relying on whatever was disclosed at the plea colloquy in court.
 That's correct. And --
 And you would take -- you would make the assumption, apparently, that on that occasion the elements, the factual basis for the plea would have been disclosed. But unfortunately, the record has been destroyed.
 It has been destroyed, but Massachusetts State law requires that there be a factual basis before the court can accept a guilty plea. And I think we can -- under the presumption of regularity that attaches to guilty pleas, you can presume that occurred.
 You can just presume that the proceeding was regular and it was disclosed. Is that right? Is -- under Massachusetts law is there any difference in the penalty at all for burglary of a house versus a motorcycle versus a car versus a vessel?
 No, there isn't. They're all punished the same. So it's not as though this was a -- a lesser included or anything like that.
 So you want us to write the opinion that we can presume that what's in the State investigative files and records was likely before the trial court? I -- I'd like to know what --
 I don't think it --
 I don't know what I'm supposed to write.
 That when the -- basically when the police report is unambiguous and when the documents in the State court file indicate that the basis for the guilty plea was the crime described in the police report, that you can infer that the factual basis for the plea, which is required under Massachusetts law, was in fact the breaking into a building as opposed to a ship or a vehicle and so forth.
 Mr. Elwood, can I tell you what's troubling me about that? Maybe the whole categorical approach is unwise. It may have been more strict than it should be. But it -- I'm puzzled by the notion that in a case that's been tried to verdict, you can only look at the indictment and the instructions, as I understand Justice Blackmun's opinion. You could not look at the testimony in the record, even though there are nine witnesses who described what happened. It seems to me that might be much more reliable than a police report. And I'm just wondering am I correct, do you think, on saying you cannot look at the testimony in the tried case? And if so, how do you -- how do you say that police reports are better than sworn witnesses?
 I think to me it's not 100 percent clear whether when Taylor referred to the jury instructions and the charging documents, that that was exhaustive of the jury trial conflict.
 It's a for example thing.
 Right. It could be something else. But I think that if you were going -- it's still possible to draw the distinction based on an administrability factor, which is the way many courts have looked at it, which is you don't want to have to have the court look back to transcripts of the whole thing versus -- for the whole trial, whereas if they can look at a discrete body of documents and say yes, this guy pleaded guilty to burglary of a building, that you can reach that conclusion. It's a line of administrability, not a -- a line of testimony with the documents.
 The thing I'm just questioning is whether this rule that you -- you're advocating is really more administrable than one that just says it seems crazy in this particular case. But -- but in the interest of having a categorical administrative rule, we'll simply say whatever the public record shows and the proceedings themselves.
 I think that it has proven administrable. And it -- it -- I think that the majority of courts allow you to look at court documents in order to determine what was -- what sort of offense was at issue and -- and that --
 How should we interpret Taylor? Do you -- do you agree with the interpretation suggested this morning by Justice Breyer, for example?
 I think it's definitely should be interpreted to include guilty pleas because taking Taylor literally, I mean, they only discussed jury trials. But every court with criminal jurisdiction, every court of appeals with criminal jurisdiction, has concluded that it includes guilty pleas. And so I think it -- it does make sense. I don't think that the Court would have in such a short section of the opinion have exhaustively addressed the entire scope of factual situations, and I don't think it would have addressed the circumstance under which most guilty pleas -- or rather, under which most convictions are obtained --
 Well, then -- but reading it that way, which is arguable, this case, but reading it that way, you'd say you can look -- what we're interested in is not what happened. We are interested in what kind of a crime was at issue. And where it's difficult to decide what crime is at issue, you can look to whatever official documents are there at the time, any court records, to make that determination, but there -- if there is any indication that they're -- they're contested, if there's any dispute as to what was at issue, then you can't count it. Then it doesn't count. What about that as a rule?
 I -- I think that is a sensible rule. I mean, basically our rule --
 So you'd say there's -- you can look to what Justice Stevens says. You can look to what is official in that record that seems to have indication of reliability, and if there is any indication at all that this was a matter in dispute, you can't count the conviction. That would be the rule.
 I -- I think that would be a sensible rule. And in this case, as -- as we indicated, not only are the police reports unambiguous, but there's a very strong reason to believe that they were the basis for the guilty plea as it was obtained on that day.
 Mr. Elwood, we had a case last term involving a search warrant, Groh against Ramirez, and it -- it was very clear that the application for the warrant identified specifically what the police were to search for, but the warrant itself didn't. And this Court held you couldn't look behind that blank warrant for the particulars that were revealed in the warrant application. And I suppose this is similar in the sense that we have the conviction and you're saying, but you can look behind that conviction to something that, we don't know, may or may not have been before the court.
 As I recall Groh, that case specifically turned on the fact that the face of the Fourth Amendment requires that the warrant describe, not that the supporting documents describe, the place to be searched and the items to be seized. And I think in this case we already know it's okay to look behind convictions because Taylor itself says so. The only question is what items are acceptable, and --
 Well, Taylor -- Taylor doesn't quite have this full for example because there's another paragraph following the for example paragraph which says we hold an offense constitutes burglary for purposes of 924(e) if either the statutory definition corresponds to generic burglary, which it doesn't here, or the charging paper, which it doesn't here, and jury instructions, which the judge tells the jury you must find this in order to convict. Those are not for examples. That paragraph says you've got three things you can look to. You can look to the statutory definition. You can look to the charging paper, and you can look to the jury instruction. And that's it.
 I think, though, that in the context that -- that is, if you're going to include guilty pleas at all for these sort of straddle offenses that -- that some of the conduct is generic burglary and some isn't, that if Taylor is accepted on face value, where it isn't an example, then it -- it basically would mean that, sub silentio, the -- the Court had held that guilty pleas could not be used at all for this sort of inquiry under the Armed Career Criminal Act, which I think would be extraordinarily or -- or it would definitely limit at least the utility of the ACCA as an act punishing recidivism because the vast majority of convictions are obtained through criminal --
 Yes, but aren't the vast majority of guilty pleas unambiguous? This is a rather rare case.
 But if the -- I don't think -- I think that whenever there is a straddle crime and that the charging document is --
 Yes, whenever straddle crimes, but -- but they're the exception rather than the rule.
 That is probably the case. I know that there are something like 28 States that have them.
 But even burglary I think in most States would be clear.
 There -- there are many States that -- that have offenses that include both generic and nongeneric burglary, although I think that it's probably true that most -- most burglary statutes are either generic or nongeneric, not sort of straddled like that. But in any event, I think it would significantly limit the utility of the ACCA. And in addition, every court of appeals with criminal jurisdiction has held that that's not what it means, that it does mean, as Justice Breyer indicated, that that was one example that the Court meant. It is, after all, a fairly abbreviated discussion that wasn't briefed by the parties in the case, and I don't think that the Court should read it so expansively based on relatively ambiguous language. If there are no further questions from the Court, we'll rely on our submission.
 Thank you, Mr. Elwood. Ms. Thompson, you have a little over 3 minutes.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens. First, I would like to point out that the Armed Career Criminal Act does not punish all recidivism. It is designed to punish the people who have prior convictions for those offenses falling -- falling within the categories. So it's not designed to punish all recidivism. Massachusetts does have generic burglary statutes. These statutes that are at issue here are not among them. But for the serious forms of burglary, such as home invasion, Massachusetts punishes those under generic burglary statutes. So those do exist. With regard to the record that the Court can look at in making this determination, it was significant in the district court that Judge Gertner was not pointed to the face of the complaint. And as you look at the complaints that are shown in the third appendix in this case, there is -- there are dates listed at the bottom. The entries in those docket sheets were made at different times, not all made at the time of a guilty plea. The Government did not present any evidence to help the court understand anything about the way the dockets were made and the entries were made when a guilty plea was taken in the district court. The third thing of interest is, as Judge Gertner found, there was no reason for a contemporaneous contest of the evidence -- of the material in the police report because the police report was not part of the plea proceeding. So what happens is the district court that's faced with the sentencing issue now has to make the determination, can I now look and see whether there was some contest years ago when the guilty plea was entered without the aid of a contemporaneous record of adjudication. And what Mr. Shepard's position is, as to what the -- the rule should be, is that where -- and we don't contest even remotely that guilty pleas don't fall under the ambit of the Armed Career Criminal Act. Taylor was a guilty plea itself. That case was a guilty plea -- is that where you have a nongeneric statute and you have a conviction by a guilty plea, that the court can look at a charging document and a contemporaneous formal record of adjudication, not simply anything that's found in the court file, and that must establish, based on that examination, that the defendant was necessarily found guilty of all the elements of generic burglary either by his own admission or by a finding by the judge. Thank you.
 Thank you, Ms. Thompson. The case is submitted.
 We will now hear argument in Illinois against Caballes. General Madigan.
 Thank you, Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: This Court has made clear on several occasions, including 21 years ago in Place and 4 years ago in Edmond, that a sniff by a drug-detection dog is not a Fourth Amendment search, and if something is neither a search nor a seizure, then it requires no Fourth Amendment justification.
 Well, we've held that it's certainly not a -- a full-blown search. It's not a search in the classic sense, but a Terry stop isn't an arrest in -- in the classic sense either. We -- we have said that that is a kind of seizure. Why do -- I think your -- your argument assumes that this for -- for purposes of search analogies that something is either a -- a full-dress search or it's not a search at all. Why isn't there a -- a possibility of -- of a kind of middle ground on searches just as there is on seizures?
 Well, this Court made clear in Arizona v. Hicks that it did not want to go down the road of creating something known as a quasi-search so that courts and police officers would be in the position of trying to determine whether or not something was a search or not.
 Oh, I -- I can -- I can just imagine the problems, but I mean, what -- I think what's -- what the -- what's bothering me about the case is that if we persist in -- in saying that -- that it's -- that it's an either and or question with no question with no possible gradation, then I assume nothing prevents the police from taking the dogs through every municipal garage in the United States and I suppose there's nothing that prevents the police from taking the dogs up to any homeowner's door, ringing the bell, and seeing if the dog gets a sniff of something when the door is opened. We're -- we're opening rather a -- a large vista for -- for dog intrusions, and -- and that's what's -- that's what's bothering me. Why -- why should we -- why should we open that vista if there is a possibility of a -- of a middle ground that would prevent it?
 Well, I would start with the reality that dog sniffs by their very nature, as this Court recognized in both Place and Edmond, are very unique both in terms of the manner in which the sniff is conducted, as well as the content of -- of the information that the sniff reveals, so that a dog sniff is only going to be able to reveal the presence or absence of contraband. And this Court has recognized that individuals have no privacy interest in the possession of contraband.
 Does that imply that your answer is yes to the question? If we say, as you urge, a dog sniff is not a search, then the police are free to parade up and down every street in the country with dogs sniffing car trunks.
 Yes. Because a sniff is not a search, a police officer would be able to take a narcotics-detection dog down the street with him or her. I can tell you that because of the limited resources -- and this is a point brought up in the Illinois Association of Chiefs of Police amicus brief -- that that is not likely to occur. In addition, I can also tell you that in the State of Illinois, the Illinois State police do not train their dogs nor do they use their dogs on people. They only use them on objects. But yes, in answer to both of your questions, because a dog sniff does not constitute a search, dogs could be used to walk down streets. They could, hypothetically, be used in parking lots, and at times they are used in parking lots.
 But they are used. I mean, we don't have to make it up. From cases we've had here, we know that they're used in places like bus depots to -- to sniff luggage that -- that passengers have carried through on -- on buses.
 Yes, they are.
 And the republic seems to have survived.
 I agree.
 One could characterize those episodes under the, quote, special needs doctrine. I mean, we are exposed to searches at airports that we would not put up with walking up and down an ordinary street. So the dogs at the terminals one expects nowadays.
 No. These aren't sniffs for -- for explosives. These are sniffs for drugs and -- and these -- these are not buses that are coming in from France. They're coming in from one American city to another. And -- and there's no more need in -- in that case than there was in this case. It was just a good -- a good place to find criminals who were carrying unlawful drugs.
 In the present case, Mr. Caballes was traveling from Las Vegas, Nevada apparently on his way to Chicago, Illinois. He was pulled over for speeding. Another officer overheard when Master Sergeant Gillette called in to dispatch that he effected --
 May I interrupt, General Madigan?
 You may.
 He was pulled over for speeding at 71 miles an hour in a 65 miles an hour zone on I-80. Right?
 Yes, that is correct, Justice Stevens.
 Did they know in advance that he was someone to look for? Because I don't imagine you arrest everybody on I-80 that goes 70 miles an hour. I've done it many times myself is why -- (Laughter.)
 Inadvertently.
 Inadvertently. (Laughter.)
 We always like to have you in Illinois. Obviously, the Illinois State Police have the ability to pull somebody over whether they're going 1 mile over the speed limit or 26 miles over the speed limit, but there is nothing in the record to indicate that they were looking for Mr. Caballes as he was traveling eastbound on I-80 towards Chicago.
 Does the record tell us what time of day it was?
 Yes. It was approximately 5:10 p.m.
 Thank you.
 You -- you answered one of the earlier questions about the possible intrusiveness of dogs everywhere by saying, well, you don't have a privacy interest in contraband, but that's never true. You don't have a privacy interest in the murder victim's body, but you still have to have a warrant to go in and get it. So that -- that just doesn't work unless I missed something.
 You do not have a privacy interest in contraband, as this Court has recognized in the Jacobsen case.
 Yes, but you have a privacy interest in your person and in your place, and that's what we're talking about. So that seems to me that that just doesn't help us.
 Well, there is a distinction that's made in terms of Fourth Amendment protections that are given to homes and people versus cars. Ever since the Carroll case, it has been recognized that a warrantless search of a car can be done if they found probable cause.
 But that's because of the nature of the place being searched not because of the nature of what you're searching for.
 Correct.
 Not necessarily.
 So it just can't be that -- so the fact that you don't have a privacy interest in contraband, it doesn't seem to me -- I -- I don't think you need that argument.
 I think you should use it. (Laughter.)
 I -- I plan on continuing to use it.
 Why -- why do you -- are you sure that Kyllo, you know, the -- the imaging case, would have come out the same way if the only thing -- the only thing -- that the imaging could pick out is not any of the other private activities in the home, but the only thing it could possibly discern is a dead body with a knife through the heart? Are you sure the case would have come out the same way? I'm not at all sure.
 I would hope the case would come out differently than --
 Well, what --
 Do you have any authority for that other than Justice Scalia's speculation about how this -- (Laughter.)
 -- how his Kyllo case might have been written?
 What about a house and -- and the use of a dog to sniff around a door access or a house just because the police think, you know, it's possible this is somebody growing marijuana in the basement or something? Is that all right?
 I would argue that, yes, it is all right to walk a dog around a house, but then as Justice --
 How do you -- how do you reconcile that with the heat sensor case then?
 The thermal imager that was used in the Kyllo case was able to reveal intimate details of the house. A dog sniff is only going to reveal the presence or absence of contraband, and because of that, that's where we suddenly get into the tension between Kyllo and Place and --
 What if the dogs get a little more sophisticated in the future and can also smell a certain kind of perfume, something like that? Would then the whole analysis change?
 Well, then you would end up in a situation as to whether or not an officer had probable cause when a dog, in fact, alerted. If he was alerting to the presence of perfume as opposed to narcotics, there would be --
 How would you know whether the -- the dog -- I don't think the dog alerts, as I'm alerting, for one reason or another. He just alerts.
 Well, they're very well trained dogs. In fact, in the State of Illinois, the dogs and their handlers go through 320 hours of training, and they're specifically trained to only alert to narcotics.
 I just learned this morning that some very well trained dogs that are trained to alert for explosives will also alert for certain kinds of rubber in a tire. They didn't realize that. And I think it's entirely possible that dogs would -- there will be false alerts by -- by dogs because it's triggered by something that -- that is not really anticipated.
 One of the things that does take place during the training of these narcotics-detection dogs is to make sure that they are not alerting to things that are not narcotics or -- I don't know exactly how the explosive training is conducted because we don't train our dogs in Illinois for explosives, but they purposely train them on narcotics not to alert to plastic wrap that is frequently the container used for narcotics, not --
 So you would agree the analysis would be different if there could be an innocent cause of the alert as well as the contraband being the cause of the alert.
 It depends. The analysis would be different if the dog was known to or had been trained to actually alert to the non-contraband.
 Or if that happened a large percentage of the time. I mean, surely you'd concede that the search is unreasonable if, for every -- every one time, you -- you make somebody open his bag because the dog actually smells narcotics, 99 times you make somebody open his bag because he has apples in it. I mean, wouldn't that go to the reasonableness of --
 Well, it would actually go to whether or not that dog provided -- that dog's alert provided probable cause to conduct a search.
 Well, do we -- we don't have the probable cause question before us, do we?
 You do not have the probable cause question before you. This dog was determined to be reliable by the trial court and the Illinois Appellate Court, and it was not part of the Illinois Supreme Court's decision.
 So what again in your view is the best distinction from Kyllo?
 Two things. One, the thermal imager used in Kyllo was able to reveal intimate details that individuals --
 Like what? I thought it was just heat?
 Yes.
 There was some disagreement on the Court about exactly what it revealed, but in terms of intimate details, it then allowed somebody --
 Excuse me. What details? It is a device that measures heat.
 Because it could measure heat, it could also potentially determine when somebody was taking a bath, taking a sauna, and doing other intimate things in the house.
 I think there was a reference to my lady's bath in the opinion.
 A nice turn of phrase, as I recall. (Laughter.)
 What was -- and what was the second?
 The second one would be the distinction between houses and cars and the protections that houses are given under the Fourth Amendment, which are far greater than the protections that people have in their cars.
 Well, so you think if this were a house, that the Kyllo case would apply?
 If this were a house in the situation, it would certainly bring out the tension between Kyllo and Place --
 Wasn't there -- didn't Kyllo -- wasn't what -- what the Court was worried about in Kyllo not just the relatively crude heat imaging that existed in the case before it, but the prospect of more and more sophisticated heat imaging which -- which we had evidence was already in development that would enable you to see people moving around a room? I thought the case referred to that. Now, are we going to have more and more -- what's going to happen with dogs? I -- I can't imagine that -- that this thing is going anywhere other than smelling narcotics and smelling bombs.
 Well, but you would argue that the same rationale should apply if, instead of using dogs, you had some sophisticated device that would buzz or ring a bell or something whenever the odor of -- of narcotics was present, wouldn't you?
 I would argue that. So if there was an ability to create a -- a mechanical dog, for instance, we would again say that the use of a mechanical dog sniff would not be a search and therefore would not --
 There's nothing magical about the fact that it's an animal rather than a sophisticated device. It has better detection capacity than a human being does. That's the only difference.
 You are correct.
 In -- in discussing the -- the answer to the -- the Kyllo issue, you've -- you place an emphasis on the protection given to a house. Would you go back to Justice O'Connor's question and my earlier example? Is it still your answer that the police can walk dogs around the foundation of the house or take a dog to the front door and ring the bell and see what it -- what it sniffs when the door is opened --
 I would --
 -- without there being a search and hence no Fourth Amendment concern?
 Yes, Justice Souter, I would say that that is possible because the sniff itself is not a search and it only reveals the presence or absence of contraband, which is something that the individual does not have privacy expectations --
 Okay. But then -- then the -- then there is no significance in the house.
 There is potentially significance in the house because the --
 Well, when does -- when does it occur? I mean, if -- if -- first you say the -- the house is -- is a matter of significance for Kyllo analysis. We're trying to draw a distinction, if there is one, between Kyllo and this, and you say they can go to the house. They can sniff the foundations. They can go to the front door, et cetera. I don't see that the house, in fact, is functioning as a distinction at all.
 This Court's precedents have shown us that in fact Fourth Amendment protections are higher in the home than they are in the car.
 Oh, I realize that, but it seems to me your basic argument, if I understand it, is there is simply no search here, and because there is no search here, it doesn't matter whether you're dealing with a house or a parking lot or a car on the road. No search is no search. So for purposes of -- if I -- I want to understand your case, and as I understand it, for purposes of your case, there is no significance in the house because there doesn't have to be. The question doesn't arise because there's no search. Is that --
 Justice Souter, that is absolutely correct. A search, as far as we are concerned -- and I believe it's based on the precedents of this Court -- is a sniff is not a search, and therefore it requires no Fourth Amendment justification.
 You said there's no disturbance of one's privacy and so that distinguishes the dog sniff from some other governmental intrusions. But dogs can be frightening, humiliating. It seems to me that there is some association with the idea that I have a right to be let alone by my government and having a large dog circle my car.
 There are in this country millions of dogs, many of the types of dogs that are used by narcotics detection teams, such as Labrador retrievers and shepherds, are identical to the pets that people own. We encounter them in the parks, on the streets, and I would contend that an officer cannot be in the position of making a determination as to whether or not the individual that he encounters is going to be frightened by the dog. Mr. Justice Stevens, if I may, I'd like to reserve the remainder of my time.
 Yes, you may save your time.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Wray.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: There's no dispute that respondent here was lawfully stopped based on probable cause. There's also no dispute that the entire stop took less than 9 minutes. The question is whether a second officer's use of a drug dog to sniff outside of that car during those 9 minutes required some separate Fourth Amendment justification.
 Do you agree with -- with General Madigan that it doesn't make any difference whether the -- the dog is a -- is a mechanical instrument or not? Do you agree it makes no difference? I thought that one of the -- one of the points in -- in the imaging case was that this was a new technology which didn't exist and that although the ordinary rules in 1791 was that there was no search unless -- you know, unless you enter the house or unless you -- you physically intrude upon the person's -- at least the person's clothes, we made an exception to that rule because of this new technology that enabled you to find out things without having to intrude into the home or into the person. Now, but -- but this is not a new technology. This is a dog and -- and they had that ability in 1791 just as they had it today. And the rule that when there's no intrusion, there's no search -- there's no reason to depart from that rule with respect to a dog although there would be with respect to some sophisticated new technology that would enable you to find out all sorts of things.
 That's correct.
 It seems to me you shouldn't -- you shouldn't assume that -- that the fact that this is a canine makes no difference.
 Are you going to rely on the fact that dogs were trained to do this sort of thing back in the 18th century?
 I'm going to rely on -- on three distinctions between this case and Kyllo, Justice Stevens. The first is that the three points that the Court looked at in Kyllo were: one, as has already been referenced, the fact that it's a home, the most sacred place under the Fourth Amendment; second, that it revealed certain intimate details; and third, that that was a technology --
 It was potentially revealed. It did not actually reveal any details.
 As -- as General Madigan referenced, there is obviously some disagreement within the Court on that issue, but the -- the fact was that the technology in Kyllo revealed information about heat in the house which could be thought to reveal intimate details about the house. The third point in Kyllo, which I think Justice Scalia is referring to, is that that was technology that was not in general public use. Dogs have been used by law enforcement across the country since Place and before to sniff everything from --
 But not in 1790.
 Not --
 Did you come here --
 You don't know that, do you?
 Did you come here having researched all about dogs in 1790? (Laughter.)
 Justice Kennedy, I cannot, I regret to say, tell you what dogs were doing in 1790. I can tell you -- and this is maybe a factual thing that might be of interest to the Court -- that the dogs who train -- who are trained to alert to detect things -- it's not that they are sniffing things that all dogs can't already smell. It's rather that they are trained to let the handler know that they've smelt whatever it is they've been trained to smell. So the smells that are coming out of Respondent Caballes' car are exposed to every dog.
 Do you really think this would be a different case if the officer had a device that did exactly what the dog -- dog did?
 We -- our position would still be, Justice Stevens, that as long as the device only revealed, as this does --
 I would think you'd take --
 -- the absence or presence of contraband, it would still be constitutional.
 Why do you rely on the -- in -- in distinguishing Kyllo, why do you rely on the house if there's no search? Why do you have to rely on the fact that there was a house involved there? You -- you listed that as one of your three distinctions.
 We don't believe we have to rely on it, Justice Souter. We do believe that there were three things that were important in Kyllo. The fact that it was a home was one of those things. Again, the -- the fact of a home, the fact that it was technology not in general public use, and --
 But that didn't go to whether it was a search or seizure. I think it goes to whether it was an unreasonable search or seizure. Don't you think so? That what -- what might be unreasonable with respect to a home would not be unreasonable with respect to a suitcase?
 Yes, Justice Scalia, that's correct.
 But -- but your -- is -- is it -- I understand it to be your position that there simply is no search here. Period.
 That is correct, Justice Souter.
 It's because it's a dog sniff.
 We would -- we would submit this is not a search because, as this Court recognized in both Place and Edmond -- and the Jacobsen case is also significant because the Court said that the reason this is not a search, there using the dog sniff by analogy, is because it compromises no legitimate privacy interest. The language of the Court in Place is significant because it says that we are aware of no other investigative procedure that is so limited in both the manner in which the information is obtained and in the content of the information revealed. That language goes not only to why it's not a Fourth Amendment search but why the use of the dog sniff during a probable cause traffic stop here, where it doesn't prolong the duration, does not transform an otherwise lawful seizure into an unlawful one.
 All right. Do you -- do you think it's -- it's reasonable to say that if the police take dogs simply onto private property to sniff the foundations of houses, if they take dogs to the front door and ring the bell so that they hope the door will open, that there is -- there is no compromise of a privacy interest?
 Well, there would be a question as to whether the officer, the human officer, that is, could be on private property -- I take it from your hypothetical, Justice Souter -- in the first place. But --
 Well, I mean, the Fourth Amendment analysis after Katz doesn't -- doesn't depend on trespass, and -- and you have said up to this point that there is no search. And then you have quite rightly said that we have had as a consideration in our minds analytically whether it's fair to say that what the police were doing involved any compromise of a privacy interest. So I'm assuming -- I'm assuming that the police can at least get to the foundation with a dog and they can certainly walk up to the front door and ring the bell. And if they do that with a dog, for the purpose of letting the dog sniff and alert, if there's anything to alert to, is it fair to say that there is no compromise of the privacy interests of the people who own the house?
 Our position would be -- the answer to that question is yes. The Court does not have to resolve that issue to decide this case.
 Of course, we could separate the home from the -- from what happened here and still validate the search here if we held that it was a search, but was a reasonable one since all you find is that the person was carrying contraband. It's the only thing that's disclosed. Whereas, if you -- if you did the same thing with -- with regard to a house, which is a more sacrosanct part of one's privacy, it might be an unreasonable search. We -- we could reach that result if we wanted to, couldn't we?
 I think you could, Justice Scalia. It's important to distinguish --
 On the other hand, if it were a drug-selling neighborhood or around a park where drugs are frequently sold, would it be legitimate in your view for the police to take drug-sniffing dogs and walk around the public street where cars are parked around that known drug-selling area and see if they could sniff out some contraband in the cars? Is that okay?
 We believe it would be okay, Justice O'Connor. It would be important not to use the dogs in a way to constitute a new seizure because in that case, you're not talking --
 I'm -- I'm assuming parked cars. You haven't interrupted anybody. Nobody is in the car, parked on a public street.
 In that instance, we believe that would be acceptable under the Fourth Amendment.
 So you -- you give no significance to the fact that this dog sniff was in the course of a lawful stop where the citizen's rights had already been curtailed to a significant extent?
 We believe, Justice Kennedy, that the -- that that context here makes this an even easier case under the Fourth Amendment, that is, the dog sniff not being a search compromising no legitimate privacy interests during the course of a lawful probable cause stop, which we know from Atwater -- the officer could have simply placed the woman under full custodial arrest and taken her down to jail -- was not an activity that transformed the seizure into an unlawful one. The Illinois Supreme Court's concern and where we think they got off track was that they were concerned that the use of the dog sniff during this 9-minute traffic stop was that it transformed it -- it used the language that it transformed the sniff into a drug investigation. We would submit that the Fourth Amendment is about the reasonableness of searches and seizures and not about what the scope of the government's investigation is. And in that sense, the court got off track. These -- this is a -- this is a means that law enforcement has been using properly in reliance on this Court's decision in Place, reinforced just 4 years ago in Edmond, for more than 21 years to detect everything from drugs to bombs to smuggled -- we have beagles in the airports that smuggle produce that's being smuggled in. Dogs are used all over the country with great effectiveness in law enforcement, and the -- we -- that is a -- a technique that we want to encourage law enforcement to pursue.
 Are there -- are there any manuals for law enforcement officers with respect to the time and place of using dogs, or it's just open season?
 Justice Ginsburg, there is extensive training of law enforcement to use dogs. It's a multi-week program that requires --
 I don't mean the training to make the dog alert properly. How the police will use them, when, under what circumstances.
 Justice Ginsburg, each agency has different policies about when they use dogs and what purpose they're trained for. In this case, as you heard, they're being used in the context of highway interdiction, and so they're trained to sniff around vehicles specifically.
 Thank you, Mr. Wray.
 Thank you.
 Mr. Meczyk.
 Justice Stevens, and may it please the Court: The State does not offer any Fourth Amendment justification whatsoever in regards to -- in this case. It argues instead that there -- there was no need for any justification, and that is incorrect for two reasons. The dog sniff in this case invaded a Fourth Amendment interest of Mr. Caballes in the context of a routine traffic search. The sniff in this case was, in fact, a search. Albeit it was a limited intrusion, it was still a search nonetheless.
 Why -- why do you say that? I mean, is -- is anything that I observe a search? I mean, suppose I -- I'm a policeman and -- and I'm looking out for, I don't know, people with a nervous tic because I think that that might be somebody who's about to commit a crime or has committed a crime. Have I searched that person because I -- I observe something external?
 Any observation I think --
 Is there no difference between an investigation and a search?
 There is in this case -- see if I understand you correctly.
 No. It seems to me your brief and -- and your statement here both seem to assume that there's a search whenever the police investigate.
 Well --
 But that's not so. They -- one can investigate without searching.
 Well, to -- see if I understand your question correctly. If you're looking with someone with that nervous tic, that would be something in open view or plain view. That's not the type of investigation I'm talking about. There is in fact, most respectfully, an investigation technique here. There's an investigation measure.
 Yes, but that isn't the --
 What about a policeman who smells marijuana coming out of a car or a residence. He's walking down the street, public street, and he smells marijuana.
 The only way I can analogize that, Justice Kennedy, is that it -- that is akin to a plain smell or plain view.
 All right. So once you say that, you realize that there are billions and billions of searches that go on every day that the police don't have to justify at all. They just look around.
 I don't --
 Okay? There are billions of them. So the real question is do they have to give a justification for this. And the argument that they don't is simply that it's not in the person's house. When you go out in a public place, even in your car, you might run into people or animals with sharp noses. And a lot of them can detect marijuana. And you know, maybe it's a Limburger cheese. I don't know. (Laughter.)
 But people are sniffing things that they don't sniff through windows into your house, but they do get odors in your car on the street. So this is the kind of search. Yes, it's a search, but one that the police don't have to justify.
 But this is with a specific investigative tool.
 Well, it's a specific investigative tool when I put on my glasses to look through a window.
 Well, this is --
 I don't see why it has to -- why that matters if in fact all -- if you go into a car, a police car, and you have -- drive through the neighborhood and look around, you are using a specific investigative tool, the police car, to look around and find out what's going on.
 This is a far more -- most respectfully, this is a far more sophisticated investigative tool.
 What I'm trying to get to is in my own mind it's not a question of the tools. It's a question of the expectation of privacy.
 Then maybe I can see if I could answer your question. Mr. Caballes in this case indeed had an expectation of privacy. When he was asked by the police officer in this case if he can consent to the search, he said no. He did not want that law enforcement officer looking in --
 But that never --
 Yes, but both Place and Edmond, opinions from this Court, said sniffs are not searches.
 Well, I --
 Do you want us to reverse that?
 Justice O'Connor, I do not -- I do not want you to reverse Place. Place, no pun intended --
 Well, and Edmond also said it's not a search.
 Well, there were --
 It was the stop of the cars in that case that caused the result.
 The way I understand Place it was contextually limited. In Place, the whole purpose of the seizure, the taking of the luggage, was to submit it to a drug-detection sniff. That is the opinion authored by Your Honor, that specifically stated -- I'm not going to say took for granted, but it specifically stated that the -- the context -- and that's what we have to look at Place -- the --
 Fine. We had a context there where we supported it, but in the process said the sniff, the dog sniff, was not a search.
 Well, I -- I --
 So you want us to say something else here.
 Well, I think that first in -- in that case, in Place, the -- the Court --
 The context here was a legitimate traffic stop.
 But it was -- unlike Place, the legitimate traffic stop here was completely unrelated to the purpose of the dog sniff. There was an absolute --
 The dog sniff is not a search. What difference does it make?
 Well, again, I would again respectfully assert that the dog sniff is a search and the way Place was decided, first, the decision had to be made, in the context of -- of that case, what was worse. What were they going to do with the luggage? Were they going to open the luggage first? So, of course, the Court had to decide in that case that it wasn't that kind of a -- a search. It wasn't as egregious a search as actually opening the luggage. Then you --
 This -- the trunk of the car didn't have to be opened here.
 I'm sorry, Your Honor.
 The trunk of the vehicle did not have to be opened here. You're talking about a dog sniffing on the exterior of the vehicle that was legitimately stopped for a traffic violation.
 Again, in this context, unlike in Place, there was absolutely no relationship between the -- the dog sniff and the dog sniff of Caballes' trunk and the sniff of the luggage that was placed at LaGuardia Airport in Place. There's a great distinction. Moreover --
 Suppose a policeman follows me around. He just -- just follows me around, observing with his -- with plain eyes, nothing else. Now, is that a search? Does he need probable cause to do that? Now, he's wasting his time and he's wasting public money and maybe he should get fired for doing it, if he has no reason to follow me.
 It's not a search.
 And maybe -- maybe I'd have a harassment action against him if he does it, you know, blatantly. But is that a search?
 It is not a search. If he follows you --
 Okay. So -- so the mere fact that one is in investigating something doesn't make it a search. What does make it a search?
 Well --
 The fact that you find out something?
 I think here the most distinctive point here is that Caballes had already been stopped unlike the hypothetical that you just presented to me. Caballes was already stopped for one -- for probable cause. There's no question about that. But then now the police launch into a wholly unrelated investigation that's --
 You think it would be better if he hadn't been stopped? If -- if they just -- just randomly walked up to somebody who was going through a toll booth and had the dog sniff the car, you think that would be a better case --
 I think --
 -- for allowing it than -- than yours?
 Even in that case, even in a hypothetical where they used the dog for a toll booth, I have a problem with that. That to me is a search. It's different than -- I would assert it's different than if they walked -- one of the hypotheticals that the Justices asked my adversary in this case, when they asked, well, what if they walked the dog instead around a -- parked cars or parked cars at a stadium? It depends for what purpose they want to walk those parked -- that dog around those parked cars. My assertion is --
 Well, they said it's to find out if there's any contraband.
 I'm sorry, Your Honor.
 The answer was they are at liberty -- the police are at liberty to use dogs to find contraband. And your -- Illinois I think was very candid with the Court in saying we have taken from your decisions that a dog sniff is not a search. So anything else is a matter of police policy. It had nothing to do with the Fourth Amendment.
 Well, I -- I strongly differ. I have to look at the purpose that they are going to use the dog for. This Court --
 Well, does it matter if, for instance, in today's world on Capitol Hill we're concerned about terrorist attacks. What if the dog is trained to alert to explosives? Now, can the police just decide they're going to sniff any car that's parked on Capitol Hill?
 Justice O'Connor, it depends on the purpose.
 Yes or no, in your view. The purpose is to disclose potential explosives in a parked vehicle.
 The answer is yes. I have no problem whatsoever.
 Wherever it is.
 Wherever it is because I look at it as a public safety exception. And this Court in the Edmond case specifically condemned a general search -- a general crime -- let me use the exact words. General interest in crime control, to quote the Edmond case. And that's --
 I still want to go back to my question because I think you may have an answer to it and I want to focus you --
 I'm struggling, yes.
 I want to focus you on the question. I think what you're doing, which is a reasonable thing to do, but it isn't my approach, look to the English definition of search. I say forget that. Let's look to the Fourth Amendment because there are a whole range of searches that don't even fall within the Fourth Amendment in the sense that we don't need a justification. And I take Place as saying that dog sniffs is one of those, whether it does or doesn't use the word English search. So I want to know why it is that this dog search is one of the ones that's a Fourth Amendment search, i.e., one of the ones that requires a justification in terms of what the Fourth Amendment is about, privacy.
 It invades a public -- I'm sorry. It invades a private space that in this particular case the respondent Caballes had a privacy interest in, that he wanted to exclude the whole world from going inside his trunk. That's the difference.
 Yes, but you don't respond to one point in Place, if I remember correctly. It must be a legitimate expectation of privacy, and if the only thing the dog can detect is something illegitimate, how can you say there's an invasion of a legitimate expectation in privacy?
 Well, it is -- it's true that one does not have an expectation of privacy in contraband, but by the same token, I have an expectation or Mr. Caballes had an expectation of -- of privacy of what's inside that closed trunk, his car. The Carroll doctrine is still good law. We still apply the Fourth Amendment in cars. It's true that the home is sacrosanct, but just because it's a home, it's not a talisman where -- where the Fourth Amendment no longer applies.
 There was something you said in -- in your brief that I thought was unclear. So may I ask you --
 Of course.
 -- if Officer Gillette, the one who did the arrest for speeding, had a dog in the back of his car, instead of having the second officer come with the dog, would it have been permissible? I thought you had conceded that it would be a different situation if the dog was already there when the car stopped.
 First of all, Justice Ginsburg, my recollection is that Trooper Gillette, who was the officer who stopped Caballes, did not have a -- a dog in the car.
 No, he didn't, but I'm asking you to imagine that he did.
 I see. If he had a dog in the car and the dog just happened to have alerted without his cuing the dog or walking the dog -- and I'll answer that in a moment too -- that would be pure serendipity. That might happen. If -- if the dog just happened to have alerted. But if the troopers deliberately drove the car close by -- and in reality, that's not what happens.
 No. I would like to take this scenario as it is except that when the officer gets out of the car, his dog comes with him.
 Okay.
 This is very -- make no other changes except that Gillette has the dog and Gillette with the dog go to Mr. Caballes' car.
 My understanding of the way this works, Justice Ginsburg, is that he just couldn't go up to the car without -- and the dog would alert. My understanding of the way these dogs are trained is that they specifically -- that the officer has to walk the dog around the car, the vehicle, first of all.
 He does that. He does that.
 He does that.
 Yes, in this case.
 He does that.
 Right.
 To cue the dog. In other words, tell him it's not playtime anymore, that he has to work.
 Right.
 To trigger something in the -- in the canine brain.
 Right.
 But you -- I'm --
 Would it be bad? Would it be bad if that's what he did?
 It wouldn't be bad that's what -- well, yes. In this case it's very bad because it's a search. There's no question. I'm not coming off of that.
 But I'm -- I'm trying to understand what you meant in your brief when you said if the dog had been in Gillette's car when Gillette stopped Caballes, the situation would have been different.
 I -- I think what I meant there -- there would have been -- it would have been purely happenstance, almost like plain view. It would have been -- without him even cuing the dog or starting to walk the dog around, my answer to that Justice Ginsburg is that that would have been all right. Except now that -- the more I think about it, I'm not so sure that it would be all right. And my answer to -- and the reason for that is I think in that case the officer, if he could do such a thing and the dog would alert, would be exploiting the situation, would just be taking the dog and walking him around the car and seeing that the dog alerted. So in other words, there -- there would be, I think, an exploitation of -- of the -- of the traffic stop.
 So then it really makes no difference whether it was Gillette who had the dog in his car or whether the dispatcher called another officer who had the dog.
 That is correct, Your Honor.
 It doesn't -- so you're retracting that. You, I think, were asked but I'm -- I'm not sure you fully answered. Suppose the police, as Atwater would allow, arrested, made a full arrest of Caballes, and then they impound his car. In the place where they put it, couldn't they have a dog go around the car there?
 Yes. Yes. I -- if we had an Atwater situation -- in this case there wasn't an Atwater situation because there was first a warning given. You're correct. There was a warning given. I'm sorry. The officer Gillette told Caballes he was going to give him a warning. So unlike the Knowles --
 But he could have. He could have. I mean --
 He could have, but he didn't.
 -- is -- is --
 But he didn't. He didn't. Instead, he chose to treat this as more of a Knowles situation. This case is -- is on all fours, no pun intended, like Knowles. In other words, in the -- in Knowles v. Iowa, the Court -- a case of this -- I'm sorry. Let me untwist my tongue. In Knowles v. Iowa, you had a -- you had a traffic stop and after the traffic stop, there was a statute that said unrelated to the traffic stop, you can go in and search. And this is the same thing. This officer here Gillette treated Caballes as the officer in Knowles in -- treated Mr. Knowles in Iowa. It's the exact same thing.
 No, but the -- the difficulty that I have with that argument is take the -- take the case of -- of the arrestable offense in which it is undoubtedly the case that although the police don't normally arrest, they -- they can. Your -- if I understand your argument, you're saying if they, in fact, do arrest, they may then take the dog around the car, and indeed, I presume you would agree, they could make an inventory search because they've got to protect themselves against claims that they lost property and so on. So there's no question that in that case, as -- as you have argued it, they could make a full-blown search and -- and certainly can use the dog. But if they choose not to arrest on the highway, they can't. My problem is how can you say that there is a reasonable expectation of privacy in case number two if you admit that the police can search in case number one. How does that affect the reasonable expectation of privacy?
